Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
(Abridged Version)
The Best Gift for the Future Generations
by the Present Generation
General Economics Division (GED)
Bangladesh Planning Commission
Ministry of Planning
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
(Abridged Version)
The Best Gift for the Future Generations
by the Present Generation
General Economics Division (GED)
Bangladesh Planning Commission
Ministry of Planning
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
October 2018 Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version)
Published by
General Economics Division (GED)
Bangladesh Planning Commission
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh
www.plancomm.gov.bd 
Copyright © General Economics Division, Bangladesh Planning Commission, October 2018
All rights are reserved. Though we encourage use of the Bangladesh Delta 
Plan 2100 by any interested person, but no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher.
A Note on this Edition
National Economic Council (NEC) approved ‘Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100’ on 04 
September 2018.
This is abridged version of the approved Plan which is also available for 
general access in Bangladesh Planning Commission’s Website: 
www.plancomm.gov.bd
Cover Designed by
General Economics Division 
Bangladesh Planning Commission
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
First Published: October 2018
No of Copies: 2500
Printed by
TURTLE
67/D Green Road, Dhaka, Bangladesh
GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission The Bangladesh Delta Plan (BDP) 2100 is the plan  moving Bangladesh 
forward for the next 100 years. We have formulated
BDP 2100 in the way we want to build Bangladesh.
-SHEIKH HASINA
Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
4 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•  Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
5Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
6 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Hotspots N0. of 
Districts Name of District 
Coastal Zone 19 Bagerhat, Barguna, Barishal, Bhola, Chandpur, Chattogram, Cox’s Bazar, Feni, 
Gopalganj, Jashore, Jhalkati, Khulna, Lakshmipur, Narail, Noakhali, 
Patuakhali, Pirojpur, Satkhira, Shariatpur.   
Barind and Drought 
Prone Areas 
18 Bogura, Chuadanga, Dinajpur, Gaibandha, Joypurhat, Kushtia, Meherpur, 
Naogaon, Natore, Nawabganj, Nilphamari, Pabna, Panchagarh, Rajshahi, 
Rangpur, Satkhira, Sirajganj, Thakurgaon 
Haor and Flash Flood 
Areas 
7 Brahmanbaria, Habiganj, Kishoreganj, Moulvibazar, Netrokona, Sunamganj, 
Sylhet 
Chattogram Hill Tracts 3 Bandarban, Khagrachhari, Rangamati 
River Systems & 
Estuaries 
29 Barguna, Barishal, Bhola, Bogura, Chandpur, Cumilla, Faridpur, Feni, 
Gaibandha, Gopalganj, Jamalpur, Kurigram, Lakshmipur, Lalmonirhat, 
Madaripur, Manikganj, Munshiganj, Narayanganj, Natore, Chapai Nawabganj, 
Noakhali, Pabna, Potuakhali, Rajshahi, Rajbari, Shariatpur, Sirajganj, Tangail, 
Khulna 
Urban Areas 7 Barishal, Chattogram, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi, Rangpur, Sylhet 
Relatively Less Hazard 
Prone (RLHP) Areas 
6 Gazipur, Jhenaidah, Magura, Mymensingh, Nilphamari, Sherpur 
Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
7Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
•
 Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
8 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
9Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
•
 The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
10 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
11Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
•
 Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
12 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
13Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
•
 Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•  Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
14 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
•
 Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
15Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
16 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
•
 Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
1    Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk Management Investment Program (ADB funded)
2 The BDP 2100 Baseline Study on “Water Resources” and “Sixty Years of Water Resource Development in Bangladesh”. 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
17Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  
collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
18 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
19Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
20 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
21Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•  Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
22 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•  Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
23Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund:
 Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
24 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
25Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
26 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: 
This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
27Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
28 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
29Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
30 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
31Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
32 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
33Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
34 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
35Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
36 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
37Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version) Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
38 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100: 
Bangladesh in the 21st Century
A. Overview
The development activities have gained tremendous momentum in the last 
decade by the dynamic leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh 
Hasina. The indicators of an exceptionally strong development record have 
inspired the country to aim even higher.  The country now aspires to reach the 
upper middle income status by 2030. Sound and eﬀective development 
policies and advantage of the hugely abundant supply of labour, a very fertile 
land, plenty of water and monsoon rains have laid the foundation of this 
achievement in the recent past. The Bangladesh Delta, the largest dynamic 
delta of the world, along with a large and growing population base, 
presented many advantages that the people and policy makers converted 
into opportunities to secure the above development gains.  Yet, the same 
delta and high population density presents many development challenges. 
With a population of about 160 million crammed into 1,47,570 km
2 including 
rivers, Bangladesh having at about 1,200 people per square kilometer is one 
of the most densely populated countries in the world. Owing to the deltaic 
formation of the country, the conﬁguration of the rivers and climate change, 
Bangladesh has been ranked as the 6th most vulnerable country in the world 
in terms of risks from natural hazards. Tidal surge, salinity, ﬂooding, river 
erosion and cyclones are regular features of the country. These features pose 
a continuous challenge to food security for the country and livelihood for a 
large part of the rural population. These delta-related challenges are just one 
source of challenge. The country faces other challenges from growing 
urbanization, declining land availability, infrastructure shortages, energy 
supply constraints and dearth in labour skills. The interface of these multiple 
challenges with limited public resources and a constrained public sector 
capacity deﬁne the policy and institutional challenges of lower middle income 
Bangladesh. Even so, past track record gives conﬁdence that with strong 
determination and eﬀort, the country has the capability to overcome these 
challenges.
In view of the long term challenges presented by climate change and natural 
hazards, the Government has formulated a long term Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100 (BDP 2100). The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium to long term 
aspirations of Bangladesh to achieve upper middle income (UMIC) status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and being a prosperous country beyond 
2041 with the longer term challenge of sustainable management of water, 
ecology, environment and land resources in the context of their interaction 
with natural disasters and climate change. The BDP 2100 looks primarily at the 
delta agenda up to 2050 but also recognizes that the decisions taken today 
have implications up to 2050 and beyond. In this regard, it sets up a long term 
vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end of the 21st 
century, but deﬁnes short and medium term goals as steps to reach that 
vision. These goals, associated strategies, policies, institutions and 
investments are moving targets and adaptive in nature. They are adaptive to 
changing natural events in order to respond appropriately and stay on the 
course to the path of the long term vision. In view of the best practice of 
Dutch Delta management, the Government has taken technical assistance 
from the Government of Netherlands to help Bangladesh develop this BDP 
2100. The General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning Commission of 
the Government of Bangladesh has formulated the BDP 2100, with support 
from Dutch and national experts. 
B. Need for an Integrated and Holistic Plan (BDP 2100) for 
Water Resources Management
A number of sectoral initiatives and plans for water and agricultural 
development sectors have been adopted in Bangladesh since 1960. 
Furthermore, national-level strategic plans such as the Five Year Plans and 
Perspective Plan have been formulated by the Government. More recently, 
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets are new global 
agenda and Bangladesh is highly committed to meeting these goals. 
However, the challenge lies in integrating these sectoral, national and global 
targets and plans into long term coherent strategies taking climate change 
and future demands into account, as well as in eﬀective implementation of 
the needed interventions in a well-coordinated manner, following a no regret 
approach. 
Typically, the sectoral plans tend to be short term oriented and independently 
pursued by the formulating ministries or departments. Whereas, goals and 
targets are at the national level and climate change and natural disaster risks 
present major downside challenges and risks that require long term 
strategies and multi-sectoral coordinated policy management under 
uncertainty. For example, the national challenge to maintain food security in 
the face of increasing population and decreasing agricultural land as well as 
the threat posed by climate change requires coordinated policy actions 
involving ministries for agriculture, environment, forests and climate change, 
land, ﬁsheries and livestock, water resources, LGRD&C, shipping, food, 
disaster management and relief, ﬁnance and planning. Similarly, to meet the 
higher water demand for achieving a greater standard of living and to protect 
the ever increasing level of investment in housing and industry from disasters, 
Bangladesh needs a long term vision, planning and implementation involving 
all government ministries and agencies that contribute to this objective.
Due to the large uncertainties with respect to climate change and 
socio-economic development, planning is being enriched with adaptive 
strategy making in several deltas in the world. Rather than providing linear 
recipes, robust and ﬂexible strategies and measures have been taken, with 
strong institutions and a good knowledge base that allows policy makers and 
stakeholders to anticipate and decide on the most appropriate investments. 
Learning from these international experiences, BDP 2100 has been developed 
in light of the many possible future paths that are possible, and is designed to 
be changed over time as new information becomes available or policy 
priorities change. So, instead of only focusing on short term ‘trial and error’ 
actions and projects, the idea is to keep the long term vision in mind while 
prioritizing short term ‘no regret’ actions.
C. Analytical Framework OF BDP 2100
The Bangladesh Delta is variously deﬁned in the literature. This report uses 
the most expansive deﬁnition of the delta that basically encompasses almost 
all districts of Bangladesh because they face numerous weather and climate 
change risks related to their location either around the sea, around major 
rivers or in water scarce zones. Only six districts are relatively less hazard 
prone owing to their location away from sea and active rivers. The BDP 2100 
is essentially an adaptive techno-economic plan involving the interaction of 
water, land use, ecosystem and climate change with development outcomes. 
Hence, hydrology plays a major role in delineating the planning regions for 
the preparation of the BDP 2100. Using the eight hydrological zones as the 
starting point, the focus has been sharpened on the magnitude of the natural 
hazard vulnerabilities facing each of the hydrological regions. This has led to 
a modiﬁed grouping of districts and areas facing similar risks of natural 
hazards and climate change. These groups are called “Hotspots” that simply 
deﬁne a broad grouping of districts and areas facing similar natural hazard 
and climate change risks. The aggregate hotspot grouping provides a 
convenient tool to summarize certain broad socio-economic characteristics 
and common risk proﬁles. They are only a ﬁrst step of analysis. The risk proﬁle 
and magnitude of vulnerabilities facing a district within and between hotspot 
districts vary considerably. In some cases, a further disaggregation to the 
district and upazilla level may be necessary to understand in detail the risk 
proﬁles. Accordingly, a risk proﬁle at the district level, and where necessary at 
the upazilla level, was also developed in formulating the BDP 2100. 
The Six Hotspots and number of districts covered are summarized below. 
Because of geographical overlap, some districts may fall in more than one 
Hotspot.
1. Coastal Zone (27,738 sq. km); 
2. Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km);
3. Haor and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km);
4. Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km);
5. River System and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km); and
6. Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km).
 Table: Mapping of Districts to Hotspot Areas
Source: BDP 2100 Analysis, GED, 2015 and ICZM Policy, 2005
D. Delta Opportunities
The delta opportunities are many. The soil and water combination of 
Bangladesh makes it a highly fertile land with multiple cropping 
opportunities. Bangladesh has wisely combined this natural advantage with 
seed-fertilizer-irrigation technology to intensify land cultivation and expand 
food production, primarily rice. Consequently, rice production has surged 
from 12 million tonnes in 1973 to 36.3 million tonnes in 2018. Along with a very 
successful population control policy, Bangladesh has now met food 
self-suﬃciency requirements with prospects for rice exports. This amazing 
achievement, despite the multiple risks posed by the delta and climate 
change, is a testimony to the resilience of the Bangladeshi society.
The plentiful of rivers, fresh wetlands, and lakes provide ample scope for 
ﬁsheries resources. Apart from that marine ﬁshing has now become a major 
source of ﬁsheries resources. More recently, Bangladesh has been 
increasingly exploiting the open access to the Bay of Bengal. Owing to the 
growing importance of ﬁsheries, the structure of agriculture is slowly 
changing as the share of crop sub sector is falling and that of ﬁsheries 
increasing. Consequently, the value-added and employment shares of 
ﬁsheries are increasing.  
The plentiful of rivers in Bangladesh provide another large comparative 
advantage. Almost all districts are connected with each other and with the 
growth centers of Dhaka, Chattogram and Khulna through river ways. The 
inland waterways provide an environment friendly and low-cost transport 
option for both passengers and cargo for the country as a whole but 
especially for the rural poor. Inland water transport is also a major source of 
rural employment. More focus on river transport can provide a huge 
development opportunity to lower the cost of transportation, reduce 
environmental degradation, conserve budgetary resources and add to 
employment prospects for the poor.
The open access to sea is a huge advantage to Bangladesh. In addition to the 
port facilities that could serve the needs of the growing internal trade and 
commerce needs of Bangladesh, with proper investments Bangladesh can 
become a regional hub for international sea transportation. Examples of 
dynamic port cities like Rotterdam, Singapore and Hong Kong show how 
proper planning and investments can dramatically convert this natural 
advantage to a huge development gain for Bangladesh. Increasingly, the 
open access to sea is becoming a major opportunity in another way. The 
rapidly growing demand for energy in Bangladesh owing to increasing GDP 
growth led by the expansion of manufacturing sector is facing a challenge of 
primary energy shortage. The rapid depletion of natural gas has led to a 
search for other primary fuels. This search has led to a strategy of procuring 
clean imported coal, LNG and LPG. All these primary energies require port 
facilities to handle these bulky cargoes. Bangladesh is slowly capitalizing this 
open access to sea by establishing new ports, in addition to Chattogram and 
Mongla ports. The ongoing Payra port construction in Patuakhali is an 
example of this. The open access to sea also opens up enormous prospects 
for developing the blue economy of Bangladesh. Marine ﬁshing is already 
emerging as a major source of domestic food, exports, income and 
employment. There is a growing demand for coastal tourism and alternative 
options to the traditional Cox’s Bazar coastal resorts. An example is the 
Kuakata coastal tourism in Patuakhali district.  
E. Delta Challenges
1) Climate Change
Temperature Rise: In the Fifth Assessment Report of the International Panel 
for Climate Change (IPCC), the globally averaged combined land and ocean 
surface temperature data show a warming of 0.85 (0.65 to 1.06) °C, over the 
period 1880 to 2012. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 
period and the 2003-2012 period is 0.78 (0.72 to 0.85) °C. For the longest 
period when calculation of regional trends is suﬃciently complete (1901 to 
2012), almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming. In addition 
to robust multi-decadal warming, global mean surface temperature exhibits 
substantial decadal and inter-annual variability. The pattern of rising global 
temperatures is expected to continue in the future. Projections show that for 
2046-2065, mean temperature rise ranges from 1.0 to 1.4°C, whereas it ranges 
from 1.0 to 3.7°C for the period 2081-2100.
Bangladesh has also experienced considerable rise in temperature.  While 
there is debate about the magnitude of future increase, there is consensus 
that global warming will increase and so will be the case for Bangladesh. In 
this Report two scenarios are considered: Business As Usual scenario (BAU) 
and Extreme scenario (EXT). The BAU considers the moderate climate change 
scenario with sustained global and national eﬀorts to reduce Green House 
Gas (GHG) emissions. The EXT considers the extreme climate change scenario 
with limited global and national eﬀorts to reduce the GHG emissions and 
fossil fuel based economic development. Projections show that temperature 
will rise in all regions in Bangladesh in future similar to the global trend. The 
magnitude ranges from 1.4 to 1.9°C for BAU and around 2°C for EXT by 2050. 
Further rise in temperature is expected in the latter half of the century, 
especially in the EXT scenario.
Rainfall: The rainfall pattern in Bangladesh is going to be more variable and 
erratic in future. There is an indication that pre-monsoon and monsoon 
rainfall will increase under BAU scenario. On an annual basis, the rainfall is 
expected to increase in most regions during 2030. But, during 2050, southern 
parts of the country along with the eastern hills might get reductions in 
rainfall. Under the EXT scenario, as temperature rise will be higher, more 
erratic behaviour of rainfall along with variation in amounts is projected.
Floods: Flood is a recurrent phenomenon of Bangladesh. Three mighty rivers 
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna meet together in Bangladesh 
forming the largest delta of the world. As a consequence, most of the country 
consists of huge ﬂood plain and delta of which, around 70% of the total area is 
less than one meter above sea level and 10% of the land area is made up of 
lakes and rivers. Bangladesh experiences heavy monsoon rains, especially 
over the highlands along with frequent tropical storms in coastal region. All of 
these events trigger frequent ﬂood occurrence in Bangladesh. On average, an 
estimated 20-25% of the country becomes inundated due to river spilling and 
drainage congestion. Extreme situation arises when the three major rivers 
(the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna) reach their ﬂood peak at a 
similar time. In general, 55-60% of the country is inundated during extreme 
ﬂood events. Recent evidence reveals that the magnitude and frequency of 
mega ﬂoods is increasing as a consequence of climate change. Other human 
causes like construction of dam in upper riparian countries, unplanned 
urbanization in illegally encroached ﬂoodplains, lack of combination of 
structural and non-structural measures, etc. are aggravating the situation. 
Research suggests that the ﬂood extent will be increased for all areas of the 
country by mid-century (2050) based on the EXT scenario. Both banks of the 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna Rivers will be worst aﬀected in this scenario. On 
average, 3-9% additional area will be inundated from the base (1978-2007) on 
the left side of the Jamuna River. On the other hand, some portion of the 
Barind region adjacent to right bank of Jamuna river will be more inundated 
(around 30%) from the base by 2050 due to ﬂooding in the EXT scenario. 
Droughts: The droughts occurring in Bangladesh are not meteorological 
droughts but agricultural droughts, which could be also termed as severe 
moisture stress. In the drought prone agro-ecological regions of Bangladesh, 
period of dry days range between 32-48 days, starting from 24 March to 21 
May. During this period the temperature also rises more than 40°C for 5 to 15 
days within the same agro-ecological regions. In addition, some soils have low 
moisture holding capacities, which show diﬀerent degrees of doughtiness. 
The government’s intervention to attack drought with the Barind Region 
Irrigation Project has changed the proﬁle of the Barind region with a rapid 
transformation of the area into an agrarian green ﬁeld with a diversiﬁed 
agriculture based on rice, fruits and vegetables. This has contributed 
substantially to lowering poverty in the North-West part of Bangladesh. Yet, 
the drought risk has been shifted forward as surface water reduction from 
diversion of river water upstream in India and inadequate rainfall in the dry 
season continues to lower the water table. So, climate change that lowers 
rainfall further in the dry season could hurt agriculture in the Barind Tract.  
River Erosion: The morphology of the country’s rivers is highly dynamic and 
river bank erosion is also a regular phenomenon, particularly along the banks 
of the main rivers. The present rate of the Jamuna bank erosion is about 1,770 
ha per year while bank erosion by Padma River is about 1298 ha per year. 
Lower Meghna erodes at a rate of 2,900 ha per year. A major reason for the 
erosion is that the discharge in the rivers is increasing. Flow records over 50 
years long for the station Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra/ Jamuna rivers) show 
that peak discharge is increasing and is peaking earlier. The average timing of 
the peak was in the middle of August but is now in the ﬁrst week of August. 
At Bhairab Bazar (Meghna), peak discharge is decreasing and its occurrence is 
delayed slightly. The time of peak has moved to the last week of September 
from mid-July in the late 1970s. At Hardinge Bridge station on the Ganges, 
peak discharge is increasing but the time of peak is advancing. The date is 
advancing by about one day in a decade. The rising peak discharges of the 
Ganges and the Brahmaputra mean increasing probability of future river 
erosion. One consolation is that if the present trend of advancing of the peak 
prevails, the chances of coincidence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra 
peaks will be less, reducing the probability of catastrophic and long duration 
ﬂoods. Along with erosion, there is also some land accretion from river 
movements and associated transport of sediments. During 1973-2015, a total 
of 52,313 ha land has been accreted. On balance land accretion is signiﬁcantly 
lower than land erosion for all three major rivers, although net erosion is the 
largest for the Brahmaputra/Jamuna River. Changes in the river ﬂow and 
sediment transport due to multi-faceted impacts of climate change are 
expected to increase the dynamics of these rivers even more.
Sea Level Rise (SLR) and Salinity Intrusion:  Sea level rise and consequently, 
salinity intrusion are the most prominent issues now in Bangladesh delta for 
its complex geographical position. IPCC (2013) predicts sea level rise from 0.2 
meter to 1 meter for low to high emission scenarios in 2100 for the Bay of 
Bengal. Analyses indicate that under EXT scenario ﬂooding extent will 
increase up to 6% and 8% from base (2005) in central part of Coastal Zone by 
2050 and 2100 respectively, which is highest among other parts of the Coastal 
Zone. The west portion of the Coastal Zone will face 5% and 6% more coastal 
ﬂooding than base by 2050 and 2100 respectively. No signiﬁcant changes have 
been found in eastern portion of the Coastal Zone.   
The rising sea level impedes fresh water availability in coastal area, expediting 
intrusion of salinity front. Both surface water and soil salinity along the coast 
may be increased with the rising sea level.  Projections suggest that in base 
(2005) condition about 10% area is under 1 ppt salinity and 16% under 5 ppt 
salinity; these areas will increase up to 17.5% (1 ppt) and 24% (5 ppt) by 2050 in 
the EXT scenario.
Cyclones and Storm Surges: Low lying areas of coastal region are highly 
vulnerable to cyclones, which pose serious threat to lives and properties of 
the region. Nearly every year, cyclones hit the country's coastal region and a 
severe cyclone strikes the country every three years, on average. Intensity of 
cyclonic storm surges as well as depth and extent of storm surge induced 
coastal inundation are likely to increase in changing climate through rising sea 
surface temperature (SST) and sea level.  The IPCC further reports that future 
cyclonic storm surges and related coastal ﬂoods in Bangladesh will likely 
become more severe as future tropical cyclones increase in intensity. In the 
EXT scenario, the areas vulnerable to inundation depths of more than 1 meter 
and 3 meters, respectively would be 14% and 69% higher than the current 
baseline scenario. A 10-year-return period cyclone in extreme scenario will be 
more intense by 2050 and cover 43% of the vulnerable area, 17% more than the 
current coverage. 
2) Upstream Development Activities in the Upstream
Being highly dependent upon developments at upstream, the diversion, use 
or storage of ﬂows from the trans-boundary rivers is of major importance to 
Bangladesh. Impacts on dry and monsoon season ﬂows, salinization, siltation 
of rivers and sediment deposition in the Meghna estuary are the most 
important factors. These, in turn, have a direct impact on the ability of the 
(coastal) ﬂoodplains to keep up with sea level rise in the Meghna estuary. The 
Ganges River has been found to be the most negatively impacted river among 
the major rivers followed by the Brahmaputra and to a much lesser extent the 
Meghna River. The most impacted regional rivers are: The Dudhkumar, 
Dharla, Teesta and Mahananda Rivers. 
3) Water Quality
Water quality worsens severely in 32 rivers (based on available data); are 
considered at risk of severe environmental degradation. Industrialization, 
including mechanization of the agriculture sector, urbanization and 
salinization, are expected to lead to further deterioration of surface water 
quality in the country. There are at least three types of direct negative 
impacts of water pollution: i) increasing health problems of the rural and 
urban population; ii) loss of agricultural and industrial productivity due to 
pollution and salt water intrusion; and iii) environmental degradation, leading 
to a degradation of the environmental services oﬀered. Key issues in 
groundwater quality include arsenic in groundwater and salinization. 
Pollution from industrial and domestic sources also constitutes a clear risk. 
About 12.6% of supply water contains arsenic. 
4) Waterlogging
Waterlogging in urban and rural areas pose a serious development challenge. 
These are caused by a number of factors, including unplanned and ineﬀective 
drainage infrastructure, encroachment on wetlands in urban and rural areas 
and the hampering of tidal ﬂows in the coastal area, especially in the 
southwest (Satkhira, Jashore Khulna and Bagerhat) and south east (Noakhali, 
Feni) coastal zones. 
Adverse Impacts of Climate Change
The climate change factors working through the geography of the 
Bangladesh Delta can have vast adverse eﬀects on the country’s 
development. The climate factors work through a large number of sectors 
that add up to substantial losses economy wide. The most vulnerable sector 
is agriculture. High temperature reduces yields of high-yielding varieties of 
Aus, Aman, and Boro rice. Climate change, especially in temperature, 
humidity, and radiation, increases the incidence of insect pests, diseases, and 
microorganisms. Simulation studies predict about 17% decline in overall rice 
production and as high as 61% decline in wheat production compared with the 
baseline situation. By 2050, this could lead to a reduction in 4.5 million tonnes 
of rice output at the 2002 level of production. Agriculture will also suﬀer from 
increase in soil salinity.  The salinity eﬀects are already severe as indicated by 
very low yields in the salinity prone areas, especially Patuakhali where the 
average rice yield is 40% lower than the national average and more than 50% 
lower than in Naogaon.  Under a moderate climate change scenario, the crop 
loss due to salinity intrusion could be about 0.2 million tonnes per year. 
Simulations show that under the BAU scenario, due to the reduction in yield, 
annual paddy production would fall by 1.60% in 2050 and 5.1% in 2100. 
Agriculture will suﬀer additionally from the higher incidence of ﬂooding 
caused by climate change, including from inundation caused by sea level rise.
The other highly vulnerable sectors are forestry and ecosystems. Many of the 
anticipated adverse eﬀects of climate change, such as sea level rise, higher 
temperatures, and an increase in cyclone intensity, will damage the forest 
resources of the country, put pressure on many climate-sensitive species, and 
cause increased erosion and deterioration of soil quality in many uplands 
forested areas. The world’s largest mangrove forest, the Sundarbans, is 
extremely vulnerable to climate change. Sea level rise will increase saltwater 
intrusion and negatively aﬀect the forest and its diverse ecosystem.
Additional adverse eﬀects will happen in loss of land and physical assets from 
inundation. At a one meter SLR, a signiﬁcant part of dryland in Bangladesh will 
be permanently inundated; the fall in production in all sectors in the economy 
due to the land quantity shock would lead to a fall in real GDP. Under the BAU 
scenario, real GDP would fall by 0.73% per year in 2030 and by up to 0.93% per 
year in 2100. Climate change and the resultant ﬂoods and cyclones will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on infrastructure in Bangladesh.  Estimates suggest that 
the capital stock in the construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually. Additional losses will happen to the road infrastructure. Health 
hazards will also intensify due to climate change. Water-borne diseases, such 
as diarrhoea and dysentery, and vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and 
dengue, are climate sensitive. Projections show growing morbidity could 
occur from dengue and malaria. 
At the macro-level, the combined eﬀects of climate change could range from 
a loss of 1.1% of GDP per year in a moderate climate change environment to 
2.0% of GDP per year in an extreme climate environment. The projections 
made for BDP 2100 using a moderate climate change environment shows a 
loss of about 1.1% of GDP per year between 2017-2041 based on the 
government’s target of achieving 9% annual average target.  This is a huge 
negative impact and provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan.  Indeed, if the Delta Plan is implemented along with 
suggested investment programmes, the Policy Scenario shows that the 
average growth rate can accelerate to 8.8% of GDP, which yields an average 
annual GDP gap of 1.9% between the BAU and the Policy Scenario. The value 
of the Delta Plan for Bangladesh is indeed very high.
In terms of loss of human welfare, district and sub-district level analysis 
shows that there is a strong positive correlation between incidence of 
poverty and the intensity of natural hazards. Some 70% of the 16 districts 
ranked as most exposed to natural disasters (intense risk category with 
ranking of 1) also show poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average using the upper poverty line for 2010. There is a similar high positive 
correlation between high-risk districts (risk ranking of 2) and poverty. Some 
67% of these districts have poverty rates that are higher than the national 
average and 13% have poverty rates same as the national average. At the 
national level, of the 15 most poverty-stricken districts, almost 90% of the 
districts belong to natural hazard risk categories 1 or 2. Regarding per capita 
income, some 80% of the most-intense hazard-prone districts (risk ratings of 
1) had per capita income below the national average. The corresponding 
percentages were: 67% for districts in risk category 2 and 100% for risk 
category 3.
F. Salient Features of BDP 2100
BDP 2100 is envisioned as a long term integrated and holistic plan that takes a 
long term view on water resource management, climate change and 
environmental challenges with a view to supporting long term development 
of Bangladesh. The opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities emerging from the 
interface of water, climate change and environmental issues are long term in 
nature. The strategies, policies and programs must also be formulated with a 
long term perspective. Yet there are immediate and medium term challenges 
that must be addressed now or in the near future. The associated short to 
medium term strategies, policies and programs will have implications for long 
term developments. As a result, long term planning is complicated by 
considerable uncertainties. Water, climate change and environment are 
heavily inﬂuenced by the behaviour of nature that is not often predictable. 
How should policies, programs and investments be formulated in the short to 
medium term to be consistent with the long term outcomes that are 
inherently uncertain? This is a major strategy challenge for the BDP 2100, 
which has been addressed by setting a clear vision and speciﬁc goals.
The BDP 2100 approach is to ﬁrst develop a broad based long term vision and 
also the mission about the likely changes of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st Century. Thus, an integrated, comprehensive and long term Delta 
Vision as well as Mission has been stated as:
Vision:    “Achieving safe, climate resilient and prosperous delta”
Mission: 
“Ensure long term water and food security, economic growth and 
environmental sustainability while eﬀectively reducing vulnerability to natural 
disasters and building resilience to climate change and other delta challenges 
through robust, adaptive and integrated strategies, and equitable water 
governance”.
This long term vision needs has been translated into speciﬁc goals or targets 
for its implementation. This is done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the 
Perspective of 2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from 
water and climate change related hazards plus targets for environmental 
conservation. 
BDP 2100 approach to long term goals: The BDP 2100 proposes 3 higher level 
national goals and 6 BDP 2100 speciﬁc goals that contribute to achieving 
these higher level goals.   
Higher Level Goals
Goal 1: Eliminate extreme poverty by 2030; 
Goal 2: Achieve upper middle income status by 2030; and 
Goal 3: Being a Prosperous Country beyond 2041.
BDP 2100 Speciﬁc Goals
Goal 1: Ensure safety from ﬂoods and climate change related disasters; 
Goal 2: Enhance water security and eﬃciency of water usages; 
Goal 3: Ensure sustainable and integrated river systems and estuaries 
management; 
Goal 4: Conserve and preserve wetlands and ecosystems and promote their 
wise use; 
Goal 5: Develop eﬀective institutions and equitable governance for in-country 
and trans-boundary water resources management; and
Goal 6: Achieve optimal and integrated use of land and water resources.
BDP 2100 approach to managing uncertainties and linking short to medium 
term to long term outcomes: Given the inherent uncertainties of the long 
term behaviour of the natural forces that inﬂuence water, climate change and 
environmental outturns, it is essential to adopt a ﬂexible and adaptive 
approach to converting the long term Delta Vision to medium term strategies 
for moving towards this vision. BDP 2100 uses the best available information 
and develops short to medium term strategies and policy options under 
diﬀerent assumptions about the external outcomes. The scenarios and 
strategies need to be updated as new information is available on a 5-year 
cycle. This adaptive approach to delta planning including selection of 
investment projects provides the link between the short to medium term 
development targets and investment programmes with the long term goals 
of sustained development based on climate sensitive management.
G. Strategies for BDP 2100
Water remains an indispensable resource and is used for both production 
sectors, such as, agriculture, industry, commercial, forestry, ﬁsheries, etc., 
and for human consumption, such as drinking, cooking and hygiene. The 
nation-wide demand for water is growing over time, which is being intensiﬁed 
by several socio-technical drivers such as, high demographic growth, rapid 
and unplanned urbanization, high sectoral demand (such as agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, transportation and industries), climate change, etc. On the other 
hand, the essentiality of water for the rich but vulnerable ecosystem of the 
country and the variability of water availability in dry and wet season 
complicates water resources management in Bangladesh. Additionally, the 
management of water resources is complicated by the fact that the ﬂow 
generated in the 93% catchment of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna originates outside the border of Bangladesh before draining out to 
the Bay of Bengal. The country is frequently hit by natural disasters such as, 
ﬂood, river bank erosion, cyclone in the wet season; and drought in dry 
season. Furthermore, the country encounters problems like water logging, 
salinity intrusion, arsenic contamination navigation problems, etc. Most 
importantly, the country confronts with growing uncertainties in receiving 
equitable water share from its upper riparian countries. Therefore, it is of high 
importance for the country to manage this critical natural resource in an 
integrated and holistic strategic manner.
The BDP 2100 therefore comes up with an adaptive, holistic and long term 
integrated plan to steer the opportunities and vulnerabilities created by the 
interface of water, climate change, natural disasters, environment, ecological 
balance, agriculture, land use and inland water management for national 
development. The sustainable use of water resources and prevention of 
water-related natural disasters provides the backbone to the Delta Plan. The 
strategies for managing water resources in wet and dry seasons that have 
been formulated are ﬂexible in respect of measures and actions with its 
timeframe and uncertainties. The strategies are adaptive in the sense of 
periodic review and update in Five Year Planning cycle on the basis of 
situation and development needs. These are ‘no regret' measures in terms of 
eﬀectiveness and maximum beneﬁt and oﬀers integrated implementation 
with innovation, advanced information technology and strengthened 
institutional capacity.
The water challenges and proposed strategies in BDP 2100 are built around 
addressing the fundamental problem of ﬂooding that is a nation-wide 
challenge and addressing hotspot speciﬁc challenges of water shortage in 
drought-prone Barind Region; river erosion problems of the river and estuary 
region; coastal inundation and salinity problems of the Coastal region; 
ﬂash-ﬂooding and wetland management issues of the Haor region; water 
shortage, sanitation and drainage problems of the urban region; and the 
water shortage problem of the CHT region. 
Strategy at National Level
Flood Risk (FR) Management Strategies 
Flood risk management strategies have been developed based on 3 principles 
as follows:
•  Strategies conducive to economic development without degrading the 
environment;
•  Developing Climate change resilient Bangladesh through optimal use of 
natural resources; and
• Climate resilient development through participatory process.  
Strategy FR 1: Protecting Economic Strongholds and Critical Infrastructure
Supporting economic development implies that those areas that are essential 
for the economic growth of Bangladesh require a high ﬂood protection 
standard. This is required to attract the investments that allow the economy 
to grow. Typical measures that can provide this level of protection include 
embankments, barriers, erosion control (e.g. by integrating the measures 
proposed by this BDP 2100 and the FRERMIP
1  project), and eﬃcient drainage 
systems. Most of these measures are already in place, albeit at a basic level. In 
addition, adapted ﬂood proof building is needed for key facilities such as 
hospitals, power stations, industrial plants and major communication 
networks between these facilities. Flood control measures will need to 
ensure that projects do not create inundation problems elsewhere by 
creating room for rivers that allow them to follow their natural courses and 
ﬁnd their pathways to the sea.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 1.1: Protection by development and improvements of 
embankments, barriers and water control structures (incl. ring dikes) 
foreconomic  priority zones & and major urban centres;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.2: Construct adaptive and ﬂood-storm-surge resilient 
building;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.3: Adopt spatial planning and ﬂood hazard zoning based 
on intensity of ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 1.4: Improvement of Flood Early Warning System  services 
(both basin and hotspot wise); and
• Sub-strategy FR 1.5: Improvement of Drainage .
Strategy FR 2: Equipping the Flood Management and Drainage (FMD) 
Schemes for the Future 
Creating a climate proof Bangladesh implies that the measures are designed 
to meet current physical and socio-economic conditions, as well as future 
developments. The country has invested heavily in FCD development over the 
past 60 years
2, FCD schemes are in urgent need of maintenance and, in 
selected areas, remodelling to equip them for the future. Future designs need 
to take into account projections of climate and hydrological change, sea level 
rise, as well changed land use and, infrastructure and urbanization. 
Considering present climate change projections, up to 2030, the rapidly 
changing socio economic conditions are more important. Beyond 2030, 
however, and depending on which scenario actually unfolds, climate change 
may have a notable impact. How the future unfolds is inherently uncertain 
and investing in measures that could be rapidly outdated due to changing 
conditions needs to be avoided. At the same time, over-dimensioning of 
structures- which later turn out to be unnecessary lead to a waste of scarce 
resources. Flexible measures that are eﬃcient under a range of boundary 
conditions are therefore most attractive. These are no-regret measures. This 
is where the Delta scenarios including climate change, sea level rise and 
socio-economic development, come into play to assess the robustness of 
diﬀerent strategies and measures. At the same time constraints inﬂicted by 
development activities of upstream countries will have to be recognized 
along with the issues and challenges of land accretion and land losses from 
river course changes.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 2.1: Management of ‘submerged char’ before  taking any 
initiative for ﬂood management and river ﬂow  management; 
• Sub-strategy FR 2.2: Drainage improvement inside FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.3: Restoration of water bodies and connectivity  among 
and between FMDI schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 2.4: Restoration, redesign and modiﬁcation of  
embankments and structures (where necessary); and
• Sub-strategy FR 2.5: River management, excavation and smart  dredging 
preceded by appropriate feasibility study. 
Strategy FR 3: Safeguarding Livelihoods of Vulnerable Communities
In addition to protecting economic strongholds, there is an obligation to 
provide safety and to support economic resilience of vulnerable regions and 
communities in the country. This is in line with the principle of ‘leaving no-one 
behind’. This type of ‘protection’ is not aimed at avoiding ﬂoods and creating 
a ﬂood free Bangladesh for all. Given the current level of economic 
development, this is not feasible within the coming decades. Considering the 
extreme natural and socio-economic boundary conditions and inability to 
ensure adequate O&M of ﬂood protection infrastructure in remote and poor 
areas, it is not a desirable goal in the medium term. ‘Leaving no one behind’ 
merely means: i) mitigating the most undesired eﬀects of large and extreme 
ﬂoods; and ii) enabling those who are aﬀected by ﬂoods to recover quickly in 
the aftermath of the ﬂood events. Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FR 3.1: Management of rivers and embankments with  
provision of fastest drainage of water during monsoon and ﬂood;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.2: Improved river management and better O&M  of FMD 
schemes;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.3: Extension and improvement of multipurpose  cyclone 
shelters and its services along with emergency services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.4: Development of ﬂood proof water supply and  
improved drainage system;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.5: Flood and storm surge prooﬁng of housing  and other 
critical infrastructure supported by quick emergency  services;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.6: Social safety net and enhancement of rapid  response 
recovery packages;
• Sub-strategy FR 3.7: River management as well as improved ﬂood  
management, drainage, O&M and ﬂow management; and
• Sub-strategy FR 3.8: Protection of Chars and its population along  with 
alternative livelihood arrangements.
Fresh Water (FW) Strategies 
Strategy FW 1: Ensure Water Availability by Balancing Supply and Demand 
for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth
The freshwater strategy is aimed to ensure water availability by balancing 
supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth. The cross-boundary 
issues become important here.  Sub-strategies include:
• Sub-strategy FW 1.1: Ensure optimum water resource management   in the 
country following basin wide management along with construction of 
necessary embankments; 
• Sub-strategy FW 1.2: New irrigation schemes for the major rivers of  the 
country;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.3: Excavation of local water reservoirs (canals,  ponds 
and baors) for restoration of water and rain water  harvesting;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.4: Construction of Rubber dam preceded by  appropriate 
feasibility study;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.5: Enhancement of freshwater ﬂows in urban  and 
regional rivers;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.6: restoration of natural reservoir  and water  bodies 
along with their biodiversity conservation;
• Sub-strategy FW 1.7: Preserving ground water level by restriction  on 
excessive extraction of ground water; and
• Sub-strategy FW 1.8: Increase the fresh water ﬂow in urban and  rural rivers 
and control of river pollution .
Construction of the Padma Barrage with proper feasibility has been 
suggested as a major activity under this strategy. Optimum uses of water of 
the Padma during dry season would be possible after construction of this 
barrage.  This will ensure availability of water for irrigation in coastal zone and 
Barind and Drought prone areas in one hand and increase the ﬂow of fresh 
water in the rivers of these areas in other hand. Overall, the production of 
agriculture and ﬁsheries will substantially increase and salinity will be 
decreased in this area. Moreover, emphasis has been given on the 
conservation of natural water bodies, excavation and re-excavation of ponds 
and canals, rain water harvesting and re-establishing connectivity of canals 
with rives as eﬀective means of increasing the availability of fresh water 
during dry season.
Strategy FW 2: Maintaining Water Quality for Health, Livelihoods and 
Ecosystems 
This strategy is based on the second objective “water quality” of the 
freshwater strategy. Water quality is a growing concern for the country, with 
many rivers and wetlands at serious environmental risk. To ensure healthy 
lives, livelihood and ecosystem of Bangladesh, the quality of water needs to 
maintain according to rules and regulation. Sub-strategy includes: 
• Sub-strategy FW 2.1: Appropriate waste management and  reduction of 
pollution in urban and rural areas;
• Sub-strategy FW 2.2: Monitoring and control of pollution; and
• Sub-strategy FW 2.3: Action research for improved ecosystem services.
Hotspot Speciﬁc Strategies
1) Coastal Zone
The Coastal Zone of Bangladesh will remain hazardous for coastal ﬂoods in 
the foreseeable future. Cyclones and accompanying storm-surges will 
continue to develop in the Bay of Bengal, as well as high river discharges and 
monsoon precipitation will continuously put an enormous pressure on the 
drainage capacity of the Coastal Delta. Besides, possible future changes in 
discharge regimes or sea level rise, the Coastal Zone will be under increasing 
pressure of socio-economic change, with economic development and 
demographic changes as main drivers. Strategies include: 
• Combating storm surge and salinity intrusion through eﬀective  
management of existing polders;
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risks;
• Balancing water supply and demand for sustainable growth;
• Reclaim New Land in the Coastal Zone;
• Sundarbans Conservation; and
• Restoration of dead/low ﬂowing rivers and basin wide  management of 
cross boundary rivers for increasing supply of  fresh water. 
Tidal River Management (TRM)
TRM is an eﬀective strategy for reducing water-logging, increasing river 
navigability and reclaiming land. In BDP 2100, it has been recommended to 
gain eﬃciency in TRM as well as its expansion to address these problems of 
coastal zone.
2) Barind and Drought Prone Areas
The Barind and Drought prone areas Hotspot was selected as representative 
for the drought – or freshwater availability - issue in the country. To support 
the Delta goals in the Barind and Drought Prone (DP) areas Hotspot and 
enhance on-going development activities, strategies include: 
• Balancing supply and demand for sustainable and inclusive growth ;
• Management of cross-boundary water issues including river basin  
developments;
• Minimising losses due to ﬂoods and drainage congestion;
• Ensuring water supply and sanitation; and
• Encouraging excavation of ponds and digging well to retain rain   water.
3) Haor and Flash Flood Areas
The haor basin has been identiﬁed as one of the food insecure regions of the 
country with both opportunities and constraints for the inhabitants. Due to 
longer period of annual ﬂooding a single crop (rice) can be grown resulting in 
food insecurity. Strategies include: 
• Protect agriculture and vulnerable communities from ﬂoods;
• Achieving fresh water security;
• Management of River and water resources;
• Sustainable management of haor ecosystem and biodiversity; and
• Integrated land and water resources management.
4) Chattogram Hill Tracts
In the hotspot ‘Chattogram Hill tracts’, both the hills and related coastal 
plains are considered, as problems experienced in the hills, like landslides, are 
related to coastal plain problems like sedimentation and recurrent dredging. 
Importantly, while for the larger rivers in Bangladesh much of the catchment 
is outside the country, in the Eastern Hill area most of the catchments of the 
important rivers is within the country’s borders, oﬀering excellent conditions 
for integrated river basin management and opportunities to address 
problems holistically. Strategies include: 
• Protect economic zones and towns from ﬂoods and storm surges; 
• Ensure water security and sustainable sanitation;
• Ensure integrated river management;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets); and 
• Develop multi-purpose resources management system for sustainable 
growth .
5) River Systems and Estuaries
The Major Rivers of Bangladesh are the backbone of the delta system and 
therefore play a central role in the BDP 2100. A long term strategy for these 
rivers therefore has national importance. Many of the water-related 
challenges in Bangladesh are related to the dynamic mighty rivers. Strategies 
include: 
• 
Provide adequate room for the river and infrastructure to reduce ﬂood risk; 
• Improvement of the conveyance capacity as well as stabilize the  rivers;
• Provide fresh water of suﬃcient quantity and quality;
• Maintain ecological balance and values (assets) of the rivers;
• Allow safe and reliable waterway transport in the river system;
• Developing strategy for sediment management including a strong  capital 
dredging and maintenance programme;
• Strengthening river and estuaries management in the newly accredited 
lands;
• Necessary arrangements for capital and maintenance dredging in  
important rivers such as the Padma, Meghna, Jamuna,  Brahmaputra, 
Dharala, Arial Khan, Kushiyara, Gorai, Monu, etc;
• Appropriate and eﬀective measures for salinity management for the rivers 
in the southern zone during dry season; and 
• Formulating policy/guidelines for proper management of ‘Balu  Mohal’, 
dredged materials/soils.
6) Urban Areas
The country’s current urban centres will continue their growth in the coming 
decades under the inﬂuence of rural-urban migration and by 2045 the 
majority of the population will live in cities. Although the focus is on the 
water-related issues in this strategy, it is important to consider the wider 
context and challenges that face urban areas now and in the future. More 
general urban planning issues, such as uncontrolled urban growth and 
haphazard development have a close connection to water-related issues, like 
ﬂood risk management. Underlying issues include high population density 
and various socio-economic and political factors that are responsible for the 
currently challenged state of urban service delivery. The impact and 
eﬀectiveness of the strategies in dealing with water-related and more general 
urbanization issues have been considered. Strategies include: 
• Increase drainage capacity and reduce ﬂood risk and waterlogging  at in 
urban areas;
• Enhance water security and water use eﬃciency in the urban areas;
• Regulate and monitor river and other water body pollution from   industries 
and human sources;
• Conserve and preserve urban wetlands and ecosystems and  promote their 
wise-use;
• Develop eﬀective urban institutions and governance;
• Integrated and sustainable use of urban land and water resources;
• Improved urban services: water supply, sanitation, wastewater  and solid 
waste management. Place special emphasis on  management of disposal 
of medical, electronic and other  hazardous waste/materials; and
• Control and monitoring of water pollution caused by industry and  other 
sources.
Strategies for Cross-Cutting Issues
1) Sustainable Land Use and Spatial Planning
Planning, managing and developing strategies for land resources are integral 
parts of BDP 2100. Land use strategy encompasses natural areas for 
agriculture, forests and watercourses as well as areas for urban and industrial 
needs. The utilization of land includes both for agricultural and 
non-agricultural land use, for which making spatial planning an integral part 
of land use management will be important. Strategies include:
• Develop eﬀective policy guidelines and rules for the Balu Mahal  and 
sediment management;
• Preserve/conserve agricultural land from ﬂoods or erosion to sustain food 
grain production;
• Prevention of salinity intrusion and desertiﬁcation; 
• Management of newly accreted land in the Meghna Estuary;
• Sustainable coastal land management for enhancing agriculture and 
non-agriculture land;
• Development of Digital Land Resource Management System;
• Reviewing and updating/enactment of Laws/Regulations relating to 
Alluvion and Diluvion to improve eﬃciency of land administration of 
accreting and reclaimed land;
• Formulation of necessary laws and acts to form Land Zoning;
• Increase climate change adaptation capacity for land management; 
• Spatial land use planning for urbanization;
• Optimization of Land Use; 
• Formulation of Spatial Planning and Land Resource Management  Act;
•
 Enhance aﬀorestation and plantation in the coastal zone for stabilizing land;
• Restoration and protection of soil health, erosion and land loss;  and
• Integrated management of coastal water infrastructures to   protect land .
2) Agriculture, Food Security, Nutrition and Livelihoods
Agriculture is likely to bear the main brunt of output losses due to climate 
change impacts and natural disasters. By 2100, climate change could impose 
costs on the Bangladesh economy that could be signiﬁcantly higher than the 
estimated global average loss. Strategies include:
• Increasing resilience of agricultural production systems;
• Diversiﬁcation in agricultural output and livelihoods;
• Lower emissions (GHGs) from agricultural land;
• Encourage establishing commercial farms;
• Introduction of Aquaponics farming system to culture ﬁsh and plants 
together;
• Using Nanotechnology in agriculture for processing, distribution and 
packaging;
• Introduce precision agriculture model ;
• Encouraging solar power in irrigation;
• Improved farm practices and technologies for mediating negative impacts 
of Climate Change;
• Preservation of ecosystems for plant, wild animals, ﬁshes, birds, etc. and 
encourage fruit tree plantation;
• Improve Wetland Management in Haor Areas for development of  ﬁsheries;
• Maintaining biodiversity to ensure long term ﬁsh availability;
• Sustainable marine ﬁsheries resources management ; and 
• Production of climate resilient Livestock;
3) Transboundary Water Management
Being within the central position of the Ganges- the Brahmaputra- the 
Meghna basins and the recipient of substantial amount of 
trans-transboundary ﬂows from several neighbouring countries, cooperation 
regarding water resources management with India, Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar 
and China is essential for Bangladesh to foster further development. Closer 
cooperation has to be ensured with neighbouring countries in view of the 
general understanding that joint cooperation outweighs individua l 
development. Strategies include:
• Development of action plan keeping the water usage of upstream  
countries in consideration;
• Selection of prospective sites for the construction of  embankments 
considering the water ﬂow from upstream and with  understanding and 
cooperation from upstream countries;
• Multi-track water diplomacy to prevent or peacefully resolve   conﬂicts;
• Continuing eﬀorts for signing of Treaty regarding the sharing of  water for 
the Teesta and all other transboundary rivers;
• Demand based common river basin management schemes have to be 
initiated;
• Third party involvement (multilateral or bilateral development  partner or 
country) to resolve transboundary water related issues; and 
• Improved basin-wide ﬂood forecasting .
4) Dynamizing Inland Water Transport System
Bangladesh is crisscrossed by a network of about 24,000 km. of rivers, 
streams and canals, constituting 7% of the country's surface. Being a land of 
rivers it always enjoyed the natural advantage of inland navigation. Strategies 
for inland waterway sector include:
• 
Regular dredging activities for maintaining ﬂow and transport in  the rivers;
• Develop reliable water system conditions for long term sustainable  IWT 
through the capital and maintenance dredging of the rivers  Padma, 
Meghna, Jamuna, Brahmaputra, Dharla, Arial khan,  Kushiyara, Gorai, and 
Manu;
•  Regular dredging should also be considered for Ghashiakhali and other 
channels in the Sundarbans;
• Ensure eﬃcient and equitable use of sand through the regular  shifting of 
the ‘Balu-mahal’ (sand quarry).  The local administration should take 
necessary steps accordingly. Speciﬁc guidelines should  be developed for 
the management of soil/sediment resultant from  dredging ;
• BIWTA to cooperate and coordinate with BWDB to provide optimal  levels 
of surface water for navigation;
• Develop the navigation network according to the societal and   economic 
demands;
• Develop, maintain & operate inland river ports, landing ferry ghats  and 
terminal facilities in ports or ghats;
• Contribute to dealing with trans-boundary water aspects by  ;developing 
mutual understanding and cooperation;
• Development of riverine and maritime ports ; and
• Initiatives for activating transboundary waterways .
5) Advancing the Blue Economy
With the settlement of maritime border disputes with neighbouring states 
Myanmar and India in 2014, the Government of Bangladesh embarked on to 
unlock the potentials. The blue economy is now considered as a new 
‘development space’ in Bangladesh. Shipping, coastal shipping, sea ports, 
ship building and recycling, marine ﬁsheries, sea salt, coastal tourism, ocean 
energy, land reclamation, maritime surveillance, human resources 
development and governance have been identiﬁed as key priority sectors. A 
total of sixteen diﬀerent approaches have been proposed. Out of those 
regional partnerships in developing the blue economy is ranked high on that 
agenda. Moreover, diﬀerent MoUs have also been signed with India. 
Strategies for Blue Economy include:
• Quick completion of multidimensional survey of marine resources;
• Increase the number of sea going vessels and modernization and   capacity 
building of the sea ports;
• Increase both shallow and deep sea ﬁshing;
• Introduction of eco-tourism and private sector initiatives in sea  cruise; and 
• Keeping the coasts and sea port pollution free.
6) Renewable Energy
Bangladesh is expected to have enormous potentiality in renewable energy 
development: Solar, Wind Energy, Biomass and Hydropower. Strategies 
include:
• Develop long term renewable energy policy as well as strategies and 
formulate a master plan for at least 50 years to harness the  potential of 
renewable energy resources in the country involving  public and private 
sector investments ;
• Promote research on the development of technology in the ﬁeld of   
renewable energy in universities and research institutions as well  as build 
capacity for its application;
• Enhance Green Growth through research and development of  renewable 
technologies including clean development mechanism  (CDM);
• Devise innovative ﬁnancing packages for grant funding and low  interest 
ﬁnancing to address aﬀordability for both grid and oﬀ-grid   renewable 
energy projects; and
• Target for at least 30% energy production from renewable sources  by 2041 
in the context of being a prosperous country .
7) Earthquakes
Bangladesh and the north eastern part of India states have long been one of 
the seismically active regions of the world, and have experienced numerous 
large earthquakes during the past 200 years. Strategies include:
• Strengthen earthquake management and enhance the capacity to   
cope with earthquakes ; 
• Design earthquake-proof structures including barrages, regulators,  sluices, 
embankments, cross-dams, roads, bridges, buildings in  conformity with 
the Bangladesh National Building codes or any other approved standards ;
• Formulate a proper land use plan for building construction in municipal 
areas ;  and
• Conduct a detailed study on identiﬁcation of faults and epicentres .
H. Macroeconomic Scenarios
The macroeconomic framework for BDP 2100 is the ﬁrst attempt to quantify 
economic impacts of climate change by linking the real side (i.e. economic 
variables) to the environment or climate change parameters.  The policy 
scenarios are built around three endogenous variables: economic growth, 
employment and poverty; two exogenous variables: natural hazards and 
climate change; and a large number of policy variables including: population 
and labor force, investment (public, private and total); sectoral investments 
including investments needed to oﬀset the various climate change risks; 
macroeconomic policies; transboundary water dialogues; and institutional 
reforms and good governance.  The scenarios are interactive in the sense that 
they allow for the interaction of endogenous variables with exogenous and 
policy variables.  As a result, the model helps answer the all important policy 
question: what happens if the BDP 2100 is not adopted? 
In order to illustrate the role of BDP 2100 and its contribution to the long term 
development of Bangladesh, two scenarios based on selected policy options 
are considered. 
•  The First Option refers to the Business As Usual Policy Option (BAU). This is 
essentially a representation of the government’s Vision 2021, Perspective 
Plan and the Seventh Five Year Plan. But importantly it directly 
incorporates the adverse eﬀects of the climate change and natural hazards 
to show how these adverse eﬀects will change the outcomes with respect 
to growth, employment and poverty without the adoption of the BDP 
2100. All policies are in place except the implementation of the Delta Plan.  
This is the business as usual policy environment of the present times where 
a coordinated eﬀort to manage the delta risks and hazards does not exist.  
• The Second Option is the Delta Plan (DP) Policy Option, which is the 
combination of the BAU with the adoption of the BDP 2100. Thus, this 
scenario incorporates the adoption of strong climate change and other 
delta related adaptation measures to achieve higher and sustainable 
growth trajectories in the face of the various weather-related natural 
hazards and risks.
The results are very striking. Under the BAU Policy Option, the GDP growth 
rate starts falling over time as the adverse eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards gain momentum. The eﬃciency of capital falls. Outmigration 
to cities from vulnerable districts increases, adding to the urbanization 
pressures.  Agriculture productivity falls. Land degradation and lower land 
productivity reduce land availability and increase land prices. Availability of 
urban land falls in relation to demand as growing urbanization from 
outmigration creates additional pressure on urban land.  Cost of urban 
production increases as ﬂooding and drainage problems damage urban 
properties and enterprises and create infrastructure problems. Urban water 
shortages, water quality and sanitation risks add to health costs and reduce 
quality of life.  The net eﬀect is an annual average GDP loss of about 1.1% 
between FY2017-41 as compared with the government’s target to achieve and 
maintain 9% average GDP growth until FY2041.  Most importantly, in this 
scenario Bangladesh is unable to reach upper middle income status and 
eliminate extreme poverty by 2030.
In contrast to the BAU option, under the DP Policy Option that incorporates 
the adoption of the BDP 2100 the negative eﬀects of climate change and 
natural hazards are considerably reduced. This allows the Bangladesh 
economy to avoid a disruption of the growth eﬀort and secure an average 
GDP growth rate of about 9%.  Based on higher GDP growth rate including the 
avoidance of loss of agricltural income and rural livelihoods, Bangladesh 
secures the development objectives of eliminating extreme poverty and 
reaching upper middle income status by 2030.
Under the BAU option, the inclusion of environmental risks and subsequent 
loss in income causes substantial losses compared to the baseline. GDP 
growth goes on a downward slide, falling from around 7.2% in FY2017 to only 
5.6% by FY2041. Owing to loss of capital stock and outputs in climate sensitive 
sectors, per capita nominal income would reach only US$ 10,540 in FY 2041, 
which would be US$ 3,837 lower than the DP scenario of US$ 14,377.  On 
average, there is a loss of 1.3% of real GDP per year in this scenario over the 
government’s target of achieving 9% GDP growth rate, which adds up to a 
cumulative loss of US$ 741 billion of income by FY 2041.  This lower GDP 
growth and income levels have signiﬁcant welfare consequences in terms of 
employment and poverty outcomes. Importantly, Bangladesh misses out on 
both UMIC and poverty targets in the BAU but achieves them in the DP Policy 
Option.  The importance of adopting the BDP 2100 is obvious.
I. Investment Cost of the BDP 2100 and Financing Options
Need for Investment
The macroeconomic and sectoral costs of not implementing BDP 2100 can be 
substantial.  At the macroeconomic level, under moderate climate change 
conditions, the costs can be as large as 1.3% lower rate of growth of GDP per 
year through the loss of physical assets and economic activities.  Others costs 
will be in terms of health risks and loss of bio-diversity.  The costs would be 
commensurately higher under a worst-case climate change environment. The 
implementation of BDP 2100 involves sectoral strategies for water, 
environment, land, agriculture (forestry, livestock and ﬁsheries) as well as 
new policies, institutional reforms and investments. These Delta policies, 
investments and institutional reforms in the delta related sectors are 
additional to the investments, macroeconomic policies and economy wide 
governance changes associated with the government’s Seventh Five Year 
Plan and their intensiﬁcation in the context of the government’s pursuit of an 
8% growth strategy. 
The implementation of the BDP 2100 involves total spending on delta-related 
interventions, through new projects and maintenance of new and old 
projects, in an amount of about 2.5% of GDP per annum. This compares with 
an annual spending of a mere 0.8% of GDP presently. In current prices and 
using the prevailing GDP, total required spending on BDP 2100 related 
projects would need to grow from the pre-BDP 2100 spending levels of about 
US$ 1.8 billion in FY2016 to about US$ 3.5 billion in FY2017 and will increase to 
US$ 29.6 billion by FY2031.  
The BDP 2100 envisages that out of the total required 2.5% of GDP, some 0.5% 
of GDP could be funded by the private sector under various initiatives 
discussed below and about 2% of GDP would need to be executed through the 
public sector. Out of this 2% of GDP ﬁnanced from the budget, about 0.5% of 
GDP would need to be spent on O&M activities and the remaining 1.5% of GDP 
should come under the BDP 2100 IP. It may be noted that at present O&M is 
very much neglected and the actual amount may not even be more than 0.1% 
of GDP. The practice of not maintaining delta related investment has led to 
rapid deterioration in the eﬃciency of water infrastructure and leading to 
complete rebuilding of the same at much higher costs. 
Investment Priorities
The list of investment priorities identiﬁed in the BDP 2100 is extensive. 
Additionally, implementation capacity constraints will limit the ability to 
design, prepare and implement large projects. So, priorities will have to be 
set.  It is important to note that BDP 2100 projects are not just physical 
investments. There is major research, knowledge and institutional gaps that 
will require complementary capacity building investments.  
Much of the public funding of BDP 2100 will need go to ﬂood protection, river 
erosion control, river management including river training and navigability, 
urban and rural water supply and waste management, and urban ﬂood 
control and drainage. These are highly capital intensive investments.  
Investments in ﬂood control, river erosion, river management including 
dredging, training and navigability are amongst the highest priority 
investments in today’s Bangladesh and will likely absorb 35% of total Delta 
investments. Secondly, the back-log of investments in urban water supply, 
sanitation, waste management and drainage in major cities coupled with 
rapidly growing concentration of population and economic density in these 
areas suggest that this category will absorb at least 25% of all delta 
investments. Thirdly, the lack of water and sanitation services in small towns 
and rural areas suggest that the need to achieve the government’s targets for 
safe water supply and sanitation for these areas will call for massive 
investments in these services. This category may absorb as much as 20% of 
total BDP 2100 investment up to FY2031. 
BDP 2100 Investment Plan (IP)
The Investment Plan consists of a total of 80 projects: 65 are physical 
projects, and 15 are institutional and knowledge development projects at the 
ﬁrst phase up to 2030. Its total capital investment cost is BDT 2,978 billion 
(US$37 billion).  All projects can be started within the next eight years, though 
given the scale and programmatic nature of some investments, construction 
in some cases will extend over decades. 
Development of the Investment Plan followed a rigorous, consultative, and 
inclusive process, using the principles of ADM. As part of the BDP 2100 
formulation process, the General Economics Division (GED) of the Planning 
Commission requested more than 20 agencies involved in work in the Delta to 
submit their priority investment projects. This generated 133 candidate 
projects with total capital costs of BDT 3,753 billion (US$47 billion).  The 
candidate projects were screened, grouped, then sequenced following an 
ADM methodology. Candidate projects were included in the Investment 
GEDif their expected beneﬁts exceed expected costs; if they contribute to at 
least one of the six BDP 2100 goals; and if they are compatible with the ADM 
approach. Of the 133 candidate projects, 80 met these criteria.
Public Sector Financing Options
As noted, presently the government spends about 0.8% of GDP on BDP 2100 
related programmes, whereas the needs are estimated at around 2% of GDP.  
Finding an additional 1.2% of GDP for public ﬁnancing of the BDP 2100 will not 
be easy. Even with optimistic assumptions about domestic resource 
mobilization incorporated in the Seventh Five Year Plan and the BDP 2100 
macroeconomic framework, some creative eﬀorts will be needed. The public 
funding of the IP is a part of the overall public investment programme for the 
national development strategy discussed in detail under various Scenarios. 
The IP is associated with the BDP 2100 Scenarios. The strategy for public 
funding is some combination of tax ﬁnancing, application of cost recovery 
based on beneﬁciary pays principle and mobilizing foreign funding including 
tapping into the global Green Climate Fund (GCF) initiative. The ﬁscal policy 
strategy of the BDP 2100 also outlines the strategy for ﬁscal deﬁcit and 
associated domestic and external borrowing strategies that are consistent 
with internal and external stability. International best practices in Delta 
management shows the strong role of the application of the beneﬁciary pays 
principle in ﬁnancing water related investments.
For example, in the Dutch Delta much of the funding of ﬂood control, 
irrigation, water supply, sanitation and waste management investments is 
ﬁnanced through the application of the beneﬁciary pays principle. The O&M is 
fully funded through cost recovery and water management is heavily 
decentralized.  Some 80% of water spending including 100% of O&M is done by 
lower levels of government.  The bulk of this spending is done by the local 
water management bodies that are managed and run as private cooperative 
enterprises with 100% application of the beneﬁciary pays principle, with some 
degree of cross-subsidies to the recognized poorer communities. 
There is ample scope for application of the beneﬁciary pays principle in 
Bangladesh Delta management. In Bangladesh, O&M funding of urban water 
and sanitation is prevalent in signiﬁcant ways.  But full cost recovery of O&M 
is not prevalent.  Moreover, the cost recovery of O&M of waste management 
is negligible.  By default, there is no cost recovery of capital cost of urban 
water supply, sanitation and waste management.  Regarding ﬂood control 
and irrigation, there is no cost recovery of either capital cost or O&M. This is 
to some extent due to the absence of local water management bodies.  Once 
these institutions are created under the proposed Delta Act, the application 
of beneﬁciary pays principle will become a reality.  Regarding urban water 
and sanitation, the institutions and regulations are in place. They need to be 
applied more rigorously. A time bound policy should be adopted whereby all 
public urban water and sanitation services must be required to gradually 
recover 100% of the O&M cost.  Over time, consideration may be given to 
recovering capital costs, starting with the relatively well-oﬀ service areas of 
the 4 WASAs (Dhaka, Chattogram, Khulna and Rajshahi). Regarding solid 
waste, cost recovery can happen through an annual service charge linked 
with the setting up of a modern property tax system. The GCF, which was 
established with the objective to mobilize climate ﬁnance to support 
scaled-up mitigation and adaptation action in developing countries, would be 
an important source of funding projects of BDP 2100.
Bangladesh has had signiﬁcant success in using its public sector 
intermediaries to incentivize the private sector, particularly in the renewable 
energy industry. As such, it is well placed to tap this important source of grant 
funding to scale up delta investments.  While a lot more needs to be done to 
ensure private enterprises fulﬁl their crucial role in the ﬁght against climate 
change, if Bangladesh can pursue her case eﬀectively, there is bright 
possibility that Bangladesh may receive fund as large as US$ 2 billion per year 
from the GCF.
Private Sector Financing Options
Eﬀective engagement of the private sector will generate sizable resources. 
The BDP 2100 projections suggest that on an average Bangladesh should be 
able to mobilize at least 0.5% GDP per year from private sector to ﬁnance 
projects of water resource management and related infrastructure. 
International experience shows that the prospects for attracting private 
investments in water treatment, water supply and sewage treatment are 
excellent.  Another prospective area is irrigation.  A third area is dredging. 
There is strong private sector interest in undertaking dredging contracts. The 
cost of dredging may be signiﬁcantly oﬀset by the sale proceeds from sand, 
making dredging costs quite low. However, there are a number of important 
technical factors and risk sharing issues that need careful management.  
Bangladesh can learn from international best practices in developing the 
proper contracting arrangements for dredging. A fourth area for PPP is land 
reclamation.  Combining land reclamation with dredging of rivers in a PPP 
concession framework would be attractive for the private sector.  Finally, PPP 
initiative is also possible in establishing river port infrastructure for IWT. 
J. Governance and Institutions
Sound implementation of public policies and programmes depends upon the 
prevailing governance environment and underlying institutional 
arrangements. These requirements gain added signiﬁcance when policies and 
programmes are cross-sectoral in nature and involve multiple line agencies.  
The BDP 2100 agenda is essentially cross-sectoral and implementation 
arrangements involve multiple line ministries, local government institutions, 
communities and private sector. Clarity of role, interdependence of actions 
and a coordinated approach are essential requirements of the institutional 
set up for BDP 2100 implementation.  The stakes are large and so are the 
resource requirements. Yet, resources are limited and there are competing 
demands.  How resources are allocated among competing demands, how 
trade-oﬀs are made and how eﬀectively programmes are implemented to get 
the best results from limited resources are major political economy issues 
that depend critically upon the prevailing governance environment. 
Globally there are many other delta experiences and Bangladesh can learn 
from these experiences with a view to avoiding their mistakes and adapting 
the positive experiences to the Bangladesh situation. Importantly, 
Bangladesh itself has a long experience in dealing with the delta issues and 
challenges. A solid review of these experiences, identifying areas of success 
and areas where there are major gaps can provide useful lessons for building 
the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the BDP 2100.
Institutions are dynamic in the sense that they evolve over time.  Starting with 
a thoughtful design that involves pragmatic solutions based on the present 
socio-political realities of Bangladesh and working within the umbrella of the 
overall capacity constraints in public administration, institutional changes can 
further evolve as implementation progresses.  The immediate challenge is to 
develop a basic minimum core arrangement now without which the 
implementation of the BDP 2100 will falter. GED will look after and coordinate 
implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 as a holistic, techno- 
economic mega plan.
Governance Issues and Challenges for Bangladesh Water Resources 
Management
Bangladesh has a long history of water management with adoption of water 
policies, regulations and institutions partly in response to water-related 
natural hazards. Nevertheless, the main focus of water management has 
been the protection of agriculture.  This is understandable in view of the 
dominant role of agriculture for food security and livelihood for the poor. One 
negative consequence of this primal focus has been the less attention to 
issues emerging from climate change, river transport, urban water supply and 
drainage including pollution of rivers and other water bodies. These later 
issues have now gained added signiﬁcance in the context of integrated delta 
management. The legal framework for water management is provided by the 
Water Act 2013, which is comprehensive and covers all aspects of water 
management as an integrated resource. According to the act, the main 
objective is to “make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use, protection and conservation of water 
resources". Since the act is of recent origin, the associated regulatory policies 
and institutions have not fully taken shape.  But, the act provides a strong 
basis for moving forward.  The Water Act 2013 currently operates through the 
use of a number of operating principles deﬁned by the National Water Policy 
of 1999 and the National Water Resource Management Plan of 2001(adopted 
in 2004).
Successive governments have engaged in detailed technical studies with 
international technical experts, but implementation has suﬀered owing to 
political, ﬁnancing and institutional constraints. A key challenge is the 
absence of local water management bodies and therefore the absence of 
key-stakeholders (beneﬁciaries) in related decision making.  A third problem 
is the lack of integration of water issues with climate change, environment, 
land management and other delta-related challenges owing to inadequate 
institutional coordination. 
Institutional Reforms for the BDP 2100 
Moving forward, the implementation of the BDP 2100 will require institutional 
reforms focused on three core objectives:
• Establishing eﬀective institutions of inter-sectoral planning,  rogramming, 
coordination and monitoring; 
• Incorporating issues of climate change, environment, bio-diversity,  
agriculture, ﬁsheries, forestry, inland water transport and land  
management and their interaction with water to develop a  c o m p r e h e n - 
sive view of the delta issues and challenges; and
• Converting each of the related institutions of water, climate  change and 
environment management, agriculture and land   management, and inland 
water transport management into strong  institutions with adequate 
technical skills in the areas of economic  management, ﬁnancing, 
institution building, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge 
management. 
Key elements of the governance and institutions under the BDP 2100
Coordination and facilitation of BDP 2100 Implementation: The government 
has agreed to assign General Economics Division (GED) the responsibility of 
overall coordination, facilitation, M&E of BDP 2100 implementation.  
Institutional capacity of GED needs to be enhanced for carrying out these 
tasks in an integrated and holistic manner for which a well-structured wing 
will be created. The ‘Delta Governance Council (DGC)’ is proposed as a small 
but high-level inter-ministerial forum chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister. DGC 
is proposed as a supervising and guiding entity and the Planning Minister 
would be the Vice-Chair. The DGC would function as a formal linkage for 
achieving political commitments regarding BDP 2100, provide directions and 
makes decisions. It would provide strategic advice and policy guidelines.
To facilitate speciﬁc project/ programme selection for inclusion in the Delta 
Plan Investment Programme, a second coordinating committee named as 
Delta Plan Project/ Programme Selection Committee (PPSC) would be 
established with Member, GED in chair and comprising of representatives of 
Finance, Planning, Water, Environment and Forestry, Agriculture, Land, 
ivestock and Fisheries and Shipping.   General Economics Division would 
manage planning and research, coordinate and facilitate the implementation 
of the BDP 2100 including selection of its investment plan, monitor Delta Plan 
implementation and update the Delta Plan. Actual implementation of BDP 
2100 approved programmes and projects would be undertaken by related 
ministries and implementing agencies.
Bangladesh Delta Fund: Bangladesh presently spends about 0.8% of GDP for 
water resources, mostly for new investments, which will increase gradually 
up to 2.5% by 2030.  Given limited resources and the need for a coordinated 
and integrated approach to delta spending, Delta Fund would be initiated 
with the consolidation of current ADP spending of 0.8% of GDP. The delta 
spending programme will be prepared and updated on an annual basis by 
GED and will include investments, O&M funding, research, capacity building 
and institutional development.
Approved programmes will be guaranteed funding for the full life of the 
project and proper balance between new projects and completion of ongoing 
projects will be ensured. O&M fund will initially come from the Delta Fund but 
over time it will be phased away by transferring responsibilities to the 
municipalities and the local water management bodies. Similarly, over time 
the Delta Fund will manage only a small number of national high priority 
projects, innovation and research. The ﬁnancing of smaller projects will 
transfer to municipalities and local water management authorities with 
quality assurance on standards and inspection functions performed at the 
national level. 
Local Water Management Bodies:  The missing water institution in 
Bangladesh is the representation in decision making of beneﬁciary 
stakeholders linked with coastal management, river management, fresh 
water wetlands (haors and baors) management, large irrigation schemes and 
ﬂood control. Establishment of this missing link in water management is an 
essential reform for successful management of the BDP 2100. These water 
management bodies fundamentally must represent the stakeholders and not 
government interests.  The water management bodies should be established 
based on a careful review of international experiences, analysis of the past 
approaches to establishing water user’s association in Bangladesh and the 
reasons for their failure, and doing additional stakeholder consultations. 
Strengthening Core Delta Institutions:  It is imperative to strengthen the core 
delta institutions for the BDP 2100 to succeed and also for the eﬀective 
implementation of the Delta Plan itself. This is a tough challenge and involves 
long term eﬀort.  Yet some core institutions require mediate attention.  These 
include:  GED, BWDB, WARPO, DOE, DOF, DAE, LGED, FD, DBHW, etc., the 
municipalities (City Corporations and Pourashavas), the WASAs, the newly 
constituted local water management bodies and all specialized institutions 
within diﬀerent non-water delta line ministries (specialized institutions 
working on delta-related issues in the ministries of agriculture, disaster 
management and relief, shipping and inland water, local government, 
environment,  forests and climate change and livestock and ﬁsheries).  The 
Ministry of Water Resources is the primary water management institution in 
the country. Its work is supported by a number of specialized agencies 
including the two core institutions: BWDB and WARPO. Both institutions need 
considerable strengthening in terms of new technology, innovation, 
integrated planning, research, economic management and consultative 
processes. BWDB will also need to help out with the establishment of the 
local water management bodies and learn to work with them collegially as a 
complementary institution rather than as a competing institution. The 
evolution of decentralized water management will face major challenges and 
will have obvious teething problems. GED, WARPO and BWDB can make this 
process smoother and less costly through proper support and coordination. 
Strengthening Cross-boundary Dialogue and Related Institutions: As a lower 
riparian, Bangladesh faces some real risks from adverse developments 
upstream. The ability to think innovatively requires both diplomacy and 
technical skills. These skills are required to come up with well thought out and 
multi-purpose river basin projects. Accordingly, the capacity of the Joint 
Rivers Commission (JRC) will have to be considerably strengthened. 
Partnership and coordination of JRC with GED, WARPO, BWDB and other 
related institutions will need to be strengthened. Possible multi-purpose 
technical options and cost-beneﬁt analyses of these options will need to be 
developed as background research to dialogue with riparian countries. 
Routine dialogue involving exchange of pleasantries and general purpose 
concerns/complaints and information sharing must give way to strategic 
dialogue aimed at problem solving and ﬁnding solutions.  Satisfactory 
progress with cross-boundary water management is a sine-qua-non for 
successful implementation of the BDP 2100. Positive results on this count will 
have far-reaching consequences including lower-cost water solutions for 
Bangladesh. The priority assigned to this task should be as high as priority 
given to large water infrastructure projects. 
Creating a Delta Knowledge Bank: Creation of a delta knowledge bank is an 
essential pre-requisite for undertaking adaptive delta management. This 
responsibility will be assigned to GED, who will create a knowledge unit with 
three main responsibilities: 
(a)  collate all relevant delta related knowledge globally and nationally into a 
digitized knowledge library; 
(b) establish a delta data bank; and 
(c) develop and implement a comprehensive delta knowledge and  data 
updating eﬀort. 
As a ﬁrst step, GED should undertake a quick stock taking of existing 
knowledge. A summary of the knowledge bank stock should be shared with 
other delta-related public and private policy and research institutions to 
develop a knowledge and data upgrading agenda. GED should review this 
agenda to check for consistency and relevance with the needs of the delta 
management, especially in the context of doing a sound monitoring and 
evaluation of the BDP 2100, and develop a 3-5 year data and research work 
programme with annual targets. Resource requirements should be 
determined. Following approval by the DGC of the knowledge work 
programme and budget, implementation may proceed through GED. Data 
work can be implemented in conjunction with the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics and other delta ministries. Research can be out-sourced to 
universities and local research institutions. GED should be responsible for 
coordination and oversight.  
Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System:  The practice of 
conducting M&E of government policies and programmes needs to have a 
stronger link with Bangladesh policy planning.  Water related M&E is no 
exception.  A solid M&E eﬀort is essential for sound implementation of the 
BDP 2100 in the context of ADM. So far as investment projects are concerned, 
the M&E is the responsibility of the implementing agencies. Similarly, M&E of 
sectoral policies and programmes should rest with the concerned sectoral 
ministry and the IMED.  Regarding M&E of the overall BDP 2100 impelentaion, 
this will be a key responsibility of GED.  As in the case of implementation of 
the knowledge agenda, GED can draw on the technical capabilities of its 
knowledge partners to help with the BDP 2100 M&E.  Needless to say, the 
M&E for the BDP 2100 will need to be done consultatively, drawing on the 
analysis of the M&E at the project and sectoral levels and involving all 
inter-ministerial agencies dealing with delta issues and IMED. 
Information and Knowledge Management and Approach : The 
comprehensive knowledge domains of delta issues as well as the adaptive 
nature of delta management emphasize the importance of knowledge 
management and the requirement of an approach. Five elements of the 
Approach are described below: 
(a)  Knowledge needs & agenda: The knowledge agenda identiﬁes nine  k e y 
subjects as burning issues along with the most important  research questions. 
(b)  Knowledge accumulation: A start has been made with the  compilation of 
the 26 Baseline Studies. These studies should be updated and new areas of 
research identiﬁed and implemented   based on knowledge gaps.
(c)  Knowledge availability: This is ensured through a web-based  information 
portal, gathering geographical data layers, studies, policy documents and 
other technical reports. 
(d)  Value realization: This shall be done from delta knowledge once it  is put 
to use in practice. For example, this can be done as input to  the 8th Five Year 
Plan and the preparation of the Climate Atlas, or  when related policies need 
to be informed by available knowledge and scientiﬁc ﬁndings. 
(e)  Delta Knowledge Community: This comprises of academics, policy 
makers, international donors, NGOs and ﬁeld workers in a   community of 
participants. This Delta Knowledge Community will be able to engage 
continuously making knowledge available to its stakeholders, enabling them 
to engage in Adaptive Delta Management. 
Reviewing and Updating of BDP 2100: As the BDP 2100 is an adaptive and long 
term plan, it needs to be integrated with the planning process of the country. 
It should be periodically and regularly reviewed and incorporated in future 
Five Year Plans routinely. Moreover, integration with new knowledge and 
technologies is necessary to enhance the present status of the plan. Its 
implementation also requires continuous monitoring and evaluation in the 
future.
--- X --
39Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (Abridged Version)
Note 40 GED, Bangladesh Planning Commission
Note General Economics Division (GED)
Bangladesh Planning Commission
Ministry of Planning
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
October 2018Impact Report 2024
www.greenleadglobal.org Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
Leading for a green world Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
IMPACT REPORT
Green Lead is a social enterprise based in Bangladesh. Traditional
leadership practiced worldwide has failed to deal with climate change.
We believe we need a different kind of leadership, i.e., green leadership,
to tackle the climate crisis. So, we are working to develop and promote
green leadership among people and organizations to enable climate
action at a scale, every day.
We are on a mission to educate, engage, and empower individuals and
organizations to enhance their capacity for addressing the impacts of
climate change.
We envision a green world where everyone equally cares about people
and the planet to live a peaceful life.
Our activities are based on three pillars of action i.e. climate
education, climate engagement, and climate empowerment. Our
initiatives can be explored at www.greenleadglobal.org. 
Mission
Vision
We can be reached at fahim@greenleadglobal.org and
greenlead.global@gmail.com.
www.greenleadglobal.org
Activities We believe education is the first step to preparing ourselves for the challenge
of climate change. We have been developing content for Gen-Z and sparked
their curiosity for knowledge-driven climate action.  Our content includes
GreenSights, GreenQuiz, ClimateBytes, ClimateStream, and Infographics. 
IMPACT REPORT
2020- 2024 
CLIMATE EDUCATION
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
50,000+
People
enlightened
200+
Content
Created
5
Unique
Categories
www.greenleadglobal.org ENGAGE is an initiative to inspire youth in climate action. During COVID, we
asked the youth to “Write a Letter to Your Mother Earth” and “Draw Your Dream
World”. On Environment Day, we celebrated their stories and dreams along
with a knowledge session on environmental justice.   
IMPACT REPORT
MAY-JUNE, 2021
ENGAGE:
Inspiring Climate Action 
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
300+
Youth 
engaged
31
Wrote to
mother earth
14
Shared their
dream world
www.greenleadglobal.org Climate Case is an event consisting of case-solving hours and activities to
inspire locally-led actions. The participants receive local climate-induced
challenges as a case and brainstorm as a group. Each team presents their
ideas and participates in a group discussion. The event concludes with a
suitable activity and a community hangout session. 
IMPACT REPORT
JULY 2023
CLIMATE CASE
@Bandarban
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
20 
Youth Leaders
4 
Challenges
Water Crisis
Deforestation
Stone Extraction
Waste Management 
4 
Teams
www.greenleadglobal.org Unplastic Bangladesh 2023 is a joint initiative by Green Lead and Sonali
Bioplastics to inspire communities to clean up plastic waste, educate others
with knowledge sessions, and eventually bring behavioral change.
IMPACT REPORT
NOV-DEC  2023
UNPLASTIC BANGLADESH 2023
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
57 
Campaigns
11,000+
People Inspired  
500+
Directly
Participated 
www.greenleadglobal.org Women for Climate (W4C) was organized collaboratively by the Center for
Climate Change and Environmental Health at the Asian University for Women
(AUW) and Green Lead, the event aimed at empowering young women to
become future changemakers in the fight against climate change.
IMPACT REPORT
JAN 2024
WOMEN FOR CLIMATE (W4C)
Understanding the Climate Change-WASH sector nexus
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
2 
Speakers
55
Engagements
44
Participants
www.greenleadglobal.org Unplastic Bangladesh 2024 continues with the support of Sonali Bioplastics and
the Embassy of the Netherlands in Bangladesh. The campaign aims to foster
behavioral change among participants through social media challenges and
photo exhibitions across the country.
Leading for a green world
IMPACT REPORT
APR-JULY 2024
UNPLASTIC BANGLADESH 2024
greenlead.global@gmail.com
87
Campaigns
20,000+
People Inspired  
1000+
Directly
Participated 
www.greenleadglobal.org Global Community Leader (GCL) is a yearly leadership program to empower
community leaders with the knowledge, skills, and resources to effectively address
environmental challenges and drive sustainable change in their communities.
Leading for a green world
IMPACT REPORT
MAY 2024 - APR 2025
GLOBAL COMMUNITY LEADER
greenlead.global@gmail.com
5
Green Leaders
3
Objectives
Equip participants with
comprehensive understanding of
climate change and sustainability
issues.
 Foster innovation and solution-
oriented thinking for environmental
challenges.
 Encourage community
engagement and collaborative
efforts for sustainable initiatives.
12+
Months
Programme
www.greenleadglobal.org Join us as an impact partner to build shared success!
Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
OUR
PARTNERS OF IMPACT
www.greenleadglobal.org Leading for a green worldgreenlead.global@gmail.com
THANK YOU
Join us as an impact partner to build shared success!
www.greenleadglobal.orgFront Cover Page  Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 
2022-2041 
 
 
Building forward stronger by charting a decade of 
investment towards realizing robust inclusive socio -
economic development that fully integrates resilience 
and low carbon economic green growth for optimized 
prosperity and economic partnerships towards 2041 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh  
 
2022  Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | i  
 
Table of Contents 
 
List of Abbreviations ii 
Executive Summary vi 
Preamble: Vulnerability to Resilience to Prosperity  x 
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION 1 
 Background: Underpinned by Green Growth in National Plans 1 
 The Mujib Vision and Measures 7 
 Introduction to the Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan  15 
SECTION 2. KEY PRIORITY AREAS 20 
 Key Priority Areas 1: Accelerated Adaptation 22 
 Key Priority Areas 2: Just Transition of Labor and Future-Proofing 
Industry with Technology Transfer 
31 
 Key Priority Areas 3: Increasing Public Revenue to Spend on the Most 
Vulnerable 
42 
 Key Priority Area 4: Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk 
Financing and Management 
56 
 Key Priority Area 5: Leveraging 21st Century Technologies for Well-
being 
70 
 Key Priority Area 6: Maximized Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency 
and Power & Transportation Sector Resilience 
78 
SECTION 3. OVERSIGHT & IMPLEMENTATION AND FINANCING 97 
 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Oversight & Implementation  97 
 The Financing Outline 98 
Glossary 112 ii | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
AF Adaptation Fund 
ASP Adaptive Social Protection 
ASPP Adaptive Social Protection Program 
BAU Business-As-Usual 
BCCRF Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund 
BCCSAP Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
BCCTF Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund 
BCSIR Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
BDP Bangladesh Delta Plan 
BDT Bangladeshi Taka 
BGMEA Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association 
BIDA Bangladesh Investment Development Authority 
BRT Bus Rapid Transit 
CCF Contingent Credit Facility for Natural Disaster Emergencies 
ccGAP Bangladesh Climate Change and Gender Action Plan 
CDM Clean Development Mechanism 
CDRFI Climate and Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance 
CERC Contingent Emergency Response Components 
CHT Chattogram Hill Tracts 
CIF Climate Investment Funds 
CPM-MH Crisis Preparedness and Management for Mental Health 
CRW Climate Response Window 
CSP Concentrating Solar Power 
CVF Climate Vulnerable Forum 
DDO Deferred Draw-down Option 
DERs Distributed Energy Resources 
DFQF Duty-free Quota-free 
DFS Digital Financial Services 
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction 
ECA Export Credit Agency 
EEV Energy Efficient Vehicles 
ESG Environmental, Social, and Governance Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | iii  
 
EU European Union 
G20 Group of Twenty 
G2P Government-to-Person 
GCF Green Climate Fund 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GEF Global Environment Facility 
GHG Greenhouse Gas 
GIIF Global Index Insurance Facility 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GOB Government of Bangladesh 
HIC High-Income Country 
HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air-conditioning 
ICS Improved Cooking Solutions 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IDCOL Infrastructure Development Company Limited 
IDRA Insurance Development and Regulatory Authority 
IGP InsuResilience Global Partnership 
ILO International Labour Organization 
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency 
IRM Immediate Response Mechanism 
IT Information Technology 
LCOE Levelized Cost of Electricity 
LDC Least Developed Country 
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
LGD Local Government Division 
LLA hubs Locally Led Adaptation Hubs 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas (also known as Fossil Gas) 
LoGlC Local Government Initiative on Climate Change 
MCPP-M Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Maximized 
MDB Multilateral Development Banks 
MoA Ministry of Agriculture 
MoCom Ministry of Commerce 
MoDMR Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief 
MoEFCC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MoF Ministry of Finance iv | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoI Ministry of Industries  
MoLE Ministry of Labour and Employment 
MoLGRDC Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operatives 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoRTB Ministry of Road Transport and Bridges 
MoS Ministry of Shipping 
MoWCA Ministry of Women and Children Affairs 
MPEMR Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources 
MRT Metro Rail Transits 
MSDC Management Skill Development Center 
MSME Micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises 
MW Megawatt 
NAP National Adaptation Plan 
NBFI Non-bank Financial Institutions 
NDC Nationally Determined Contribution 
NHRDF National Human Resource Development Fund 
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
NSDA National Skills Development Authority 
NSDC Bangladesh National Skills Development Council 
NTFPs Non-timber Forest Products 
OCAG Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General 
P2G Person-to-Government 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PPAs Power Purchase Agreements 
PPCR Pilot Program for Climate Resilience 
PPP Public Private Partnerships 
PPT Parts Per Trillion 
PSF Private Sector Facility 
PWD Persons with Disability 
RCF Rapid Credit Facility 
RD&D Research, Development, and Deployment 
RE Renewable Energy 
RFI Rapid Financing Instrument 
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | v  
 
SEIP Skills Employment Investment Program 
SIF Sustainable Insurance Facility 
SLCPs Short Lived Climate Pollutants 
SME Small and Medium Enterprise 
SPV Special-purpose Vehicles 
SREDA Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority 
T&D Transmission and Distribution 
TOF Trees outside Forest 
TOTS Training of Trainers 
UMIC Upper Middle Income Country 
UN United Nations 
USD United States Dollar 
V20 Vulnerable Twenty Group of Finance Ministers  
VCM Voluntary Carbon Markets 
VRP Vulnerability to Resilience to Prosperity 
4IR 4th Industrial Revolution 
7FYP 7th Five Year Plan 
8FYP 8th Five Year Plan vi | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Executive Summary 
 
Bangladesh faces increasing catastrophic impacts of climate change that could result 
in a 6.8% loss in GDP per year by 2030 if business as usual is pursued globally. For 
this reason, we need to build Bangladesh’s resilience to make sure that the threat 
multiplier of climate change does not affect the country's prosperity. Thus, the Mujib 
Climate Prosperity Plan  (MCPP) includes a number of ambitious new and 
strengthened adapta tion efforts to build resilience in populations and ecosystems 
through investment this decade to contribute to 2041 outcomes. Minimizing and 
averting climate -induced losses and damages is also an international financing  
priority of this Plan.  The MCPP was launched under Bangladesh’s second tenure as 
president of the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF). It works to counteract climate -
induced damage and losses by equipping vulnerable communities, industry, and the 
government with the Mujib vision supported by optimized financing tools and models 
that will be key to the new risk management paradigm to bring about resilience and 
stability, especially for small businesses, vulnerable populations, and the economy.  
 
The M CPP shifts Bangladesh’s trajectory from one of v ulnerability to resilience to 
prosperity (VRP). The Plan’s principal aims are to secure Bangladesh’s prosperity  by 
2041, launching an economic transformation with actions that: 
 
● Increase growth by maximizing resilience with loss and damage financing 
through Locally Led Adaptation Hubs, including by increasing gender 
responsiveness, supporting internally displaced people, strengthening the 
digital economy, enhancing financial protections, and expanding our green 
economic partnerships. This work aims to enabl e us to attain upper middle -
income status within a single decade. 
 
● Strengthen employment in a green economy, that is climate -resilient, low -
carbon, resource efficient, gender -responsive and socially inclusive  for faster 
job creation, upskilling of the work force to high quality green tech jobs, and 
greatly increasing the level of protection in the workplace. 
 
● Promote well -being and traditional living to take advantage of 21st-century 
technologies together with inherently sustainable, traditional lifestyle practices 
and living. These actions aim to promote physical and psychological well-being, 
and greatly enhanced mobility for all, while protecting the environment through 
cleaner air, special health programs and support arrangements. 
 
● Secure our own resilience, energy independence and energy security, and to 
become a net green energy exporter to the world. With international and other 
investment support, we hope to reach 30% renewable energy by 2030 and up 
to 40% by 2041, with grid resi lience and modernization. Our flagship energy 
projects include the Bongoposagor Independence Array, one of the first large -
scale hybrid RE -adaptation infrastructure projects that will revitalize a Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | vii  
 
mangrove green belt to protect our threatened coastlines. A s with strategic 
Energy Hubs, we will convert coal plants into green energy facilities such as 
hydrogen works.  
 
The MCPP will be achieved within the framework of already -foreseen national 
planning documents and processes to boost their aims and suppor t robust delivery 
on the 2030 UN Sustainable Development Agenda for Bangladesh. MCPP envisions to 
drive investment and have a midterm evaluation of its targets in 2030, with an aim to 
change the narrative from vulnerability to resilience to prosperity and thus shifting 
towards sustainable prosperity by 2041 . The Plan envisages ambitious, accelerated 
implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, especially the delivery of 
the UNFCCC -agreed USD 100 billion per year for the period 2020 to 2024 towards 
which the MCPP also serves as the nation’s climate resilience strategy and co-benefits 
from long-term low GHG emissions. The plan is considered a living document and will 
be updated every 5 years to take into consideration the evolving technology lear ning 
rates and access to resources.  
 
The MCPP expects investment opportunities in resilient pathways including energy, 
water, transport, supply chains and agriculture value chains, to reach USD 90 billion 
over the next decade.  
 
Optimized financing struct ures to attract foreign direct investment 1  and mobilize 
domestic private sector capital include the use of public-private partnerships (PPP) as 
a key solution to climate investment in coordination with the PPP Authority. The 
Bangladesh Bank can use different tools to incentivize investment in low -carbon and 
climate-resilient infrastructure, including preferential refinancing rates, differentiated 
capital requirements such as a “fossil fuel penalizing factor” commensurate with risk 
and higher capital requirements for non-low-carbon and non-climate-resilient projects.  
 
Special purpose vehicles for climate resilience can be supported, such as the state -
owned enterprises, to better underwrite green off -take agreements. Other alternative 
financing tools for the delivery of the Plan include special leasing facility windows and 
de-risking instruments.  
 
The V20’s Accelerated Financing Mechanism for the targeted use credit strengthening 
of national banks includes subordinated debt investment that lowers the cost of  
capital. Finally, the risk -layering approach in the Climate and Disaster Risk 
Management and Financing Strategy including the V20’s Sustainable Insurance 
Facility will utilize cost -effective reduction in exposure to climate risks that will 
integrate inves tments in risk reduction (adaptation), risk retention (e.g., budgetary 
allocations for contingency funds for low impact, high-frequency events), risk transfer 
on and across different levels (e.g., for high impact, low(er) frequency events) and 
contingency financing.  
 
1 Foreign direct investment must be compliant with Bangladesh Bank regulations. viii | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
 
There are significant opportunities for technology -transfer partnerships and building 
manufacturing capacity in Bangladesh including in areas such as green hydrogen, 
solar, electric vehicles, modernized power grid and other resilient and quali ty 
infrastructure. Partnerships can also be leveraged for green supply chains and value -
engineering in agriculture, fisheries, and manufacturing. The regional partnerships in 
South Asia (including through the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation), 
feature connectivity with neighboring countries that can strengthen value -
chain/supply-chain integration.  
 
Moreover, the South Asia region can cement regional energy security through least -
cost options that are competitive enough to attract global manufacturing, agriculture, 
fisheries, and services. In addition, there is an opportunity to explore Bangladesh 
foreign direct investment in member CVF/V20 countries to earn foreign currency 
overseas.  Incremental gains of over USD 50 billion per year would be added to GDP 
versus business as usual, yielding USD 850 billion over 10 years. Delaying these 
investments in infrastructure and adaptive capacity would result in costs and losses 
of at least 4.9% of GDP by 2030, equivalent to at least USD 30 billion per year by 2030. 
 
During the Bangladesh presidency of the CVF and V20, we launch a new ‘Climate 
Prosperity’ program for the development and implementation of the strategic 
economic-climate-SDG investment and cooperation frameworks to advance CVF and 
V20 ambitions for resilience and prosperity across our economies, commencing with 
Bangladesh’s ‘Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan’ in honor of the centenary year of 
Bangladesh’s Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, who is not 
only remembered as a hero for Bangladesh’s independence but also as a visionary for 
the preservation of nature and the environment of Bangladesh. The five-point proposal 
from the 1st Climate Vulnerables Finance Summit 2 put forward by the CVF Chair, 
Hon’ble Prime Minister H.E. Sheikh Hasina urges every vulnerable country to actively 
consider adopting a ‘climate prosperity plan’ and requests the international 
community to provide comprehensive support to realize the plans a nd the developed 
countries to facilitate green recovery of CVF and V20 countries through dedicated 
support in reducing the cost of capital and encouraging private sector participation.  
In a visionary statement delivered at the COP 26, Hon ’ble Prime Minister H.E. Sheikh 
Hasina placed another four-point proposal3 urging global leaders to work together. 
• First, the major emitters must submit ambitious NDCs, and implement those. 
 
2 Hasina, S. (2021, July 8). Opening Speech by H.E. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister Government of the 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the 1st Climate Vulnerable Finance Summit. Vulnerable Twenty 
Group. Retrieved July 11, 2022, from https://www.v-20.org/our-voice/statements/chair/speech-by-h-e-
sheikh-hasina-prime-minister-government-of-the-peoples-republic-of-bangladesh 
3 Hasina, S. (2021, November 1). National Statement by H.E. Sheikh Hasina Honorable Prime Minister 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the 26th Session of the Conference of the 
Parties (COP26) , UNFCCC. Retrieved April 27, 2022 from https://thecvf.org/our-
voice/statements/chair/the-statement-of-bangladesh-the-cvf-cop26/ Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | ix  
 
• Second, developed countries should fulfil their commitments of providing 100 
billion dollars annually with a 50:50 balance between adaptation & mitigation. 
• Third, the developed countries should disseminate clean and green technology 
at affordable costs to the most vulnerable countries. The development needs 
of the CVF countries also need to be considered. 
• Fourth, the issue of loss & damage must be addressed, including global sharing 
of responsibility for climate migrants displaced by sea -level rise, salinity 
increase, river erosion, floods, and draughts. 
 
Named after symbolic icons of national independence and prosperity of each 
participating member country, through these plans, CVF -V20 countries will work to 
catalyze the economic transformation of our member economies facing both similar 
and unique climate challenges to launch a decade and more of progress propelled by 
fast-tracked action. Our goal is to improve our key socio-economic growth outcomes 
– national and disposable income, poverty reduction, investment, jobs, economic 
stability, trade balance, and other critical socio-economic results – by optimizing core 
economic and climate responses together. Our plans will form a CVF and V20 
contribution to vital change in systems of the global economy. Through economic 
cooperation, the realization of prosperity plans could represent signi ficant 
opportunities for investment and trade, technology transfer, and manufacturing 
partnerships. We strongly believe that the CVF and V20’s potential, as green growth 
engines for the world economy, will be sustainable through our joint efforts. x | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Preamble: Vulnerability to Resilience to Prosperity  
 
Hard-fought development gains and increased productivity will continue to be 
undermined or reversed if the 1.5 ° Centigrade limit of the Paris Agreement is 
breached. Episodic climate -induced disasters and losses are only one subset of the 
threats facing the Bangladeshi people and industry.  Other such threats stem from 
slow-onset effects such as drought, sea-level rise and ocean acidification which may 
inflict more lasting harm to Bangladesh’s economic aspirations.  
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan (MCPP) counteracts climate-induced damage and 
losses by equipping vulnerable communities, industry, and the go vernment with the 
Mujib vision supported by optimized financing tools and models that will be key to 
embracing a new risk management paradigm that would bring about resilience and 
stability, especially for small businesses, vulnerable populations, and the economy. 
The MCPP leverages the financing of the Eighth Five Year Plan 202 0-2025 of 
Bangladesh, Vision 2041, and Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 with synergies from the 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP), National Adaptation 
Plan 2023-2050 (NAP) and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) submitted in 
2021, to unlock a pathway for fast-tracked attainment of the Sustainable Development 
Goals by 2030 and GDP per capita growth commensurate to upper middle -income 
status. 
 
The implementation of the MCPP’s to unlock new private funds could pave the way 
for Bangladesh’s anticipated graduation from least developed country status in 2026. 
This accomplishment would enable diversified capital sources, including the private 
sector, blended finance  and enhanced economic cooperation, improved market 
access through competitive positioning globally, export competitiveness and 
diversification, as well as strengthened financial protection and resilience. Looking 
forward to 2041, there is scope to consider ambitious financing initiatives including a 
variety of instruments such as resilience bonds, forecast based financing, among 
other options. 
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan shifts Bangladesh’s trajectory from one of 
vulnerability to resilience to prosperity (VRP). This shift must happen in the decade to 
2030, yet the MCPP also positions Bangladesh strategically into the long -term, with 
this Plan including perspectives beyond 2040 to mid -century, in alignment with the 
Climate Vulnerable Forum Vision and the Paris Agreement.  
 
Under the leadership of the Government of Bangladesh as Presidency of the Climate 
Vulnerable Forum (CVF), the vulnerable nations adopted the ‘Dhaka -Glasgow 
Declaration’ outlining their demands for COP26 that urged high emitting countries to 
keep the 1.5 Centigrade survival limit within reach through annual climate target 
ambition raising at each COP. In this Declaration, leaders also called for a Delivery 
Plan from the 1st V20 Climate Vulnerables’ Finance Summit for the $500 billion climate Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | xi  
 
finance commitment from developed states. The urgency of the “Climate Emergency 
Pact'' mandates yearly ambition raising for governments and especially major carbon 
emitters for every year through to 2025. With the aim to restore confidence in the Paris 
regime’s ability to deliver despite failures in the materialization of climate finance and 
of parties to the Paris Agreement, the Pact would aim to comply with the Agreement 
by updating or renewing enhanced NDCs. With the priorities on loss & damage, robust 
carbon markets, accelerating adaptation, new & improved climate finance and shifting 
trillions, the Dhaka -Glasgow Declaration also articulates the CVF’s priorities in six 
areas beyond t he work of the UNFCCC, including limiting maritime emissions, and 
oceans protection, support for transition to renewable energy, scaling efforts for 
protecting people displaced during disasters, and committing resources for a just 
transition towards low carbon development and promoting green jobs 
 
This is also aligned with the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration On  Forests and Land Use, 
which emphasize on the critical and interdependent roles of forests of all types, 
biodiversity and sustainable land use in enabling the world to meet its sustainable 
development goals. The Declaration urges attention to help achieve a balance 
between anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removal by sinks; to adapt to 
climate change; and to maintain other ecosystem services. To reflect back on the 
collective and individual commitments to the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and the Paris Agreement, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the UN 
Convention to Combat Desertification, the Sustainable Development Goals – this 
Declaration for sustainable land use, and to the conservation, protection, sustainable 
management and restoration of forests, is critical and aligns with the priorities of the 
MCPP. Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration On Forests and Land Use indicates that in order 
to meet the optimal goals of the global land use, climate, biodiversity and sustainable 
development goals, both globally and nationally, it will require transformative further 
action in the  interconnected areas of sustainable production and consumption, 
infrastructure development, trade, finance and investment. As indicated in the MCPP, 
investment in the realization of locally-led adaptation outcomes will include locally-led 
nature-based solutions to protect natural resources in communities while improving 
the state and quality of ecosystems for multiple dimensions of resilience. For 
example, technologie s and tools that help smallholder farmers and producers 
increase income reduce input costs stemming from premium prices for sustainably 
produced products. Aligned with that scope, Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration On Forests 
and Land Use aims to support smallho lders, indigenous peoples, and local 
communities – who depend on forests for their livelihoods – to have a key role in their 
stewardship. This can be coined through six priority areas which includes to conserve 
forests and other terrestrial ecosystems and accelerate their restoration; facilitate 
trade and development policies, internationally and domestically, that promote 
sustainable development; reduce vulnerability, build resilience and enhance rural 
livelihoods, including through empowering communities,  the development of 
profitable, sustainable agriculture; implement and, if necessary, redesign agricultural 
policies and programmes to incentivise sustainable agriculture, promote food 
security, and benefit the environment; reaffirm international financial  commitments 
and significantly increase finance and investment from a wide variety of public and xii | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
private sources, while also improving its effectiveness and accessibility, to enable 
sustainable agriculture, sustainable forest management, forest conservatio n and 
restoration and to facilitate the alignment of financial flows with international goals 
to reverse forest loss and degradation, while ensuring robust policies and systems are 
in place to accelerate the transition to an economy that is resilient and a dvances 
forest, sustainable land use, biodiversity and climate goals .  
 
Equally important to recognize is the world has to share the responsibilities of the 
climate migrants who have been internally displaced people due to the impacts of 
climate change li ke sea -level rise, river erosion, increasing salinity, floods and 
droughts. 30 million people are at risk to be displaced from the coastal areas in 
Bangladesh with severe implications on livelihood, habitat, drinking water, and rural 
economy.  Currently, Bangladesh has 6 million climatically displaced people. Matched 
with the need to safeguard the 1.5 ᴼC warming of the Paris Agreement is to upscale 
adaptation resources, especially through locally-led adaptation hubs as a key program 
to build resilience. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 1  
 
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Background: Underpinned by Green Growth in National Plans 
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan is built on the foundation of the major national 
planning document, 8th Five Year Plan (8FYP) 2020–2025 of Bangladesh. The 8FYP is 
critical to achieving the outcomes in the Vision 2041, Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, National Adaptation Plan 2023-
2050, Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 2021, Bangladesh Climate Change  
and Gender Action Plan (ccGAP) and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030.  
 
Bangladesh foresees an accelerated pace of transformation in the forthcoming 
decade. There is an unprecedented opportunity to enable green growth through the 
redesign of po wer markets and build resilience in industry, education, healthcare, 
transportation, and communication to ensure more prosperous outcomes with lower 
power prices, more investment, diversified export base, improved efficiency, and an 
upskilled workforce.    
 
The existing national plan is called “Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action 
Plan”. It is focused mainly on eradicating poverty and achieving economic and social 
well-being for everyone. This will be achieved through a pro -poor climate change 
strategy, which prioritizes adaptation and disaster risk reduction, and also addresses 
low carbon emission, technology transfer and the provision of adequate finance. The 
updated Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan is built on 11 pillars: 
(1) Na tural Resource Management: Water, Bay of Bengal, Biodiversity and Soil; (2) 
Ensure and Sustain Food and Nutrition Security; (3) Industry and Power; (4) Health; (5) 
Social Protection and Gender; (6) Regional and Urban Dimensions of Climate Change; 
(7) Compr ehensive Disaster Management; (8) Infrastructure; (9) Low Carbon 
Development and Mitigation; (10) Research and Knowledge Management; and (11) 
Governance: Legal, Institutional and Policy Aspects.   
 
Bangladesh will be highlighted as a global benchmark in the MCPP, which will provide 
a holistic path to prosperity. The strategy will be implemented to optimize resilience 
and sustainability as well as to ensure Bangladesh's fiscal sustainability. Fighting  
climate threats and increasing resilience will require a coordinated effort from the 
entire government and society at large. The whole -of-government model requires 
participation from not only ministries and departments, but also local government, 
parliament, and even the security and military institutions, as well as the judiciary. The 
corporate sector, media, academia, civil society, and organizations for professionals 
such as engineers, lawyers, doctors, planners, and others are all included in the whole-
of-society approach. 
 
The Government of Bangladesh (GOB) commits to rapid growth that is balanced with 
an emphasis on an equitable distribution of the benefits of growth for all, especially 2 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
for vulnerable people. As the GOB accelerates development outcome s, 
complementary to achieving this is the sustainable use of key natural resources such 
as land, water, forestry, natural habitat, and the atmosphere to avoid depletion and 
degradation. Planning principles include: (1) Human Rights -Based Approach; (2) 
Leave No One Behind; (3) Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; and (4) Do No 
Harm. Also, equally important is planetary justice and climate equity where vulnerable 
countries like Bangladesh are assisted with requisite finance and technology to meet 
development aspirations. 
 
The 8FYP’s core theme is “Promoting Prosperity Fostering Inclusiveness” through a 
labor-intensive, export -oriented manufacturing -led, agricultural diversification, 
strengthened cottage, small and medium enterprises, and a modernized servi ces 
sector, among others. The 8FYP underpins the green growth strategy and investment 
ambition of the MCPP through:  
• Building quality infrastructure that matches that of upper-middle-income 
economies 
• Reducing moderate poverty to 12 percent and extreme poverty to 5 percent by 
2025 
• Graduating from Least Developed Country (LDC) status by 2026 
• Achieving major SDGs targets. 
 
Bangladesh’s success in climate prosperity planning and implementation hinges on 
investment in green growth infrastructure and access, education, health, and poverty 
reduction. Such spending demands institutional modernization, new sources of funds 
and inn ovative financing tools such as credit strengthening to reduce the cost of 
capital. The MCPP 2022-2041 aims to leverage green financing opportunities until 
2030 while expanding the toolkit to other opportunities such as resilience bonds up to 
2041. With financing to be leveraged by this decade, 2030 will be considered the 
medium-target and 2041 as the final target, matching Long-Term Strategies under the 
Paris Agreement. 
  
The Vision 2041 aims for Bangladesh to reach high-income country (HIC) status with 
per capita income of over USD 12,500, full engagement with the digital world by 2041 
and the complete eradication of extreme poverty. The vision is embedded in the 
“Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021 –2041” (PP 2041), a development strategy 
document layi ng out policies and programs to achieve these ambitious goals, 
including in key areas such as: 
• Human development through quality education and consequent demographic 
dividend 
• Sustainable agriculture for food security, and rural development 
• Industrialization, export diversification, and employment generation 
• Sustainable power and energy 
• An innovation economy that fosters ICT and scientific research 
• Building transport and communication infrastructure for sustained rapid 
growth 
• Managing urban transition Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 3  
 
• Ensuring sustainable environments while creating a climate -resilient nation in 
a dynamic delta and unlocking the potential for a blue economy. 
 
Bangladesh’s Delta Plan 2100 (BDP 2100) takes into consideration the unique long -
term challenges for development outcomes presented by climate change and natural 
hazards. The BDP 2100 seeks to integrate the medium - to long-term aspirations of 
Bangladesh to achieve upper-middle income countries (UMIC) status and eliminate 
extreme poverty by 2030. From there the goal is a p rosperous country beyond 2041 
with the longer -term challenge of sustainable management of water, ecology, 
environment, and land resources in the context of their interaction with natural 
disasters and climate change.  
 
While the BDP 2100 looks primarily at  the delta agenda up to 2050, it also notes that 
decisions made in the present will have implications beyond 2050. Therefore, the BDP 
2100 sets up a long -term vision for the evolution of the Bangladesh Delta by the end 
of the 21st century and defines short - and medium-term goals as steps to reaching 
that vision. These goals and their associated strategies, policies, institutions, and 
investments are dynamic. They can be adapted in response to change in natural 
events and relevant to paving the pathway to the long-term, sustainable delta vision. 
 
The MCPP 2041 aligns with the long-term plans outlined in the Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100. In terms of long-term integrated techno-economic mega plan, Bangladesh Delta 
Plan (BDP) is to integrate all delta -related sector plans and policies for the long term 
and to present actionable interventions with a roadmap for realization. A key priority 
of the MCPP 2022-2041 includes the development of climate -resilient and nature -
based agricultural and fisheries supply and value chains including national disaster 
risk financing and management to safeguard food and water security. MCPP     ’s long-
term vision would to be translated into specific goals or targets for its implementation, 
keeping national priorities and existing policies in the forefront.  Similarly, BDP’s long 
term plan to secure the future water resources and mitigate the lik ely effects of 
climate change and natural disasters as an integrated, comprehensive and Delta 
Vision is a parallel effort. This would be done by combining long term development 
outcomes in terms of economic growth and poverty reduction in the Perspective o f 
2041 with targets for reducing long term vulnerability from water and climate change 
related hazards plus targets for environmental conservation. This is proposed in the 
BDP 2100 approach to the long term goals which proposes three (3) higher level 
national goals and six (6) BDP 2100 specific goals that contribute to achieving these 
higher-level goals. According to the BDP, strategies are developed at three levels of 
which the first includes at national level managing flood risk and freshwater 
management. Second, it then looks into hotspot levels of Bangladesh including the 
Coastal Zone (27, 738 sq. km), Barind and Drought Prone Areas (22,848 sq. km), Haor 
and Flash Flood Areas (16,574 sq. km), Chattogram Hill Tracts (13,295 sq. km), River 
Systems and Estuaries (35,204 sq. km) and Urban Areas (19,823 sq. km). Finally, BDP 
would address the cross -cutting issues, including sustainable land use and spatial 
planning, agriculture, food security and livelihood, trans -boundary water resources 4 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
management, dynamic inland water transport, blue economy, renewable energy, and 
earthquakes.  
 
In the last several decades , Bangladesh’s leadership in technical and political 
dimensions of climate change has been outlined through its national level 
engagements from relevant mi nistries. This includes the National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA), Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
(BCCSAP), engagements outlining from the Climate Change Trust Act, 2010. The 
actions oriented with these policies including aware ness raising, capacity building, 
and project implementation in vulnerable regions, with special focus on agriculture 
and water resources. The MCPP complements the mandates of the BCCSAP to help 
the vulnerable and poor communities to strengthen their resilience and ability to adapt 
to climate changes, with a focus on financial capital. As a key operational document 
on climate change, BCCSAP tries to operationalize sustainability across the following 
themes: Food Security, social protection and health; comp rehensive disaster risk 
management; infrastructure; research and knowledge management and mitigation 
and low carbon development and capacity building and institutional strengthening.  
The MCPP 2022-2041 aims to further complement the efforts of the BCCS AP 
engaging the concerned ministries, public representative, members of parliamentary 
committee, civil society etc. to realize the priorities across each of the thematic areas. 
It takes shared responsibility to implement the climate action plan with the 
mainstream attention of national development. BCCSAP’s target for a new 
vulnerability map to be developed in the context of climate change vulnerability 
complements MCPP’s proposals for enhancing vulnerability mapping. BCCSAP 
indicates the need for also de monstrating other livelihood indicators through these 
mapping e.g. (health, education, communication system, income source etc.) which 
shows further complementarity and scopes for reevaluation as the plan is revised.  
 
The MCPP contributes to the strengthening of macroeconomic management and the 
realization of the comprehensive 8FYP including:  
 
1) Rapid rural transformatio n: Over the next decade, rapid transformation will 
take place in rural Bangladesh in terms of ICT, transport and logistics facilities, 
modernization of agriculture, healthcare, education, infrastructure, financial 
inclusion, enterprise development, domestic c onsumption, training, and 
capacity building. The Government will take measures in promoting modern 
agricultural practices, providing rural electrification, improving health 
education services, encouraging the development of micro, small, medium 
enterprise, and other industries. The MCPP outlines a host of potential 
projects and investment roadmaps in modernization of agriculture, 
development, and financial support of micro-, small - and medium -sized 
enterprises (MSMEs)  contributing to financial inclusion, an d rural 
electrification. 
2) Boosting investment: The role of the private sector and public –private 
partnerships (PPP) will be crucial in achieving the vision outlined in the 8FYP. 
A significant part of the partnerships will come in the form of investment and Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 5  
 
trade by North –South, South–South, regional and international cooperation. 
These investments are expected to have compounded positive effects in 
science, technology, and innovation. The MCPP specifies financing structures 
for all identified projects and programs, and the level and form of international 
support being sought to realize these. 
 
3) Harnessing the potential of the young workforce and supporting SME 
development: A key priority in the 8FYP is to create adequate employment for 
the growing labor force, provide training and skills that match the market 
demand (local and global), and encourage enterprise building. The 8FYP also 
seeks to drive growth in the SME sector through a supportive environment and 
policy incentives. The MCPP outlines job opportunities to be created through 
a just transition and modernization of the labor force to better compete in the 
labor markets of the future including reskilling and upskilling via technical and 
vocational education and training, as well as improved efficiency via 
automation. It also outlines measures for needs -responsive financial 
protection of MSMEs that support proactive risk management, risk reduction, 
and immediate liquidit y needs, as well as enhanced productivity through 
innovative and alternative financing platforms.  
 
4) Encouraging women’s empowerment: Promotion of female labor 
participation across all sectors remains a key priority in the 8FYP. The MCPP 
also focuses on fin ancial protection of women -led and owned MSME s and 
through innovative financial risk management tools such as Sustainable 
Insurance Finance targeted at industries with higher female participation. 
Actions outlined across the Plan also contribute to increasing protection and 
resilience of women from climatic shocks and climate-related crises. 
 
5) Consolidating revenue mobilization:  The 8FYP emphasizes reforming 
existing tax structures to increase revenue through broadening the tax base. 
The MCPP encourages a cl imate finance strategy, optimized structures and 
certainty in the carbon markets to raise investment and additional revenue 
opportunities of up to 0.2% of GDP by 2025 and up to 1% of GDP by 2030.   
 
6) Rapid implementation of mega infrastructure: The 8FYP assigns top priority 
to mega infrastructure projects such as Metro Rail Transits (MRT), Bus Rapid 
Transit (BRT), and expressways that improve mobility with increased speed 
and reliability to accelerate economic activity. Public –private partnerships 
and multil ateral loans can be effective financing tools for such major 
infrastructure projects. The MCPP outlines quality infrastructure and 
transportation such as high-speed electric rail and the modernization of urban 
mobility. It further includes the creation of green and credit-enhanced special 
purpose vehicles, alternative financing tools to improve the affordability of 
modernization, and the utilization of a dedicated green capital market, among 
others. 6 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
7) Eradicating poverty, reducing regional disparity and man aging urban 
transformation: The 8FYP renews emphasis on minimizing regional disparity 
through social safety nets, scaling up investment in health, education, and 
physical infrastructure. The strategy for urbanization will focus on 
decentralized development, improved utilization of land and preserving and 
improving urban environments, particularly water bodies. The MCPP will 
accelerate investment in protective infrastructure to strengthen resilience 
with a special focus on inland and coastal flooding. 
 
8) Promoting modern sustainable agriculture for nutrition for all:  The 8FYP 
aims to address the issues related to nutrition, food security, food safety, 
production, sustainability, and impact of climate change through national level 
interventions and cooperation f rom development partners. The MCPP 
outlines the development of climate-resilient agricultural and fisheries supply 
chains. These would include national disaster risk financing and management 
to safeguard food and water security by adapting food supply chai ns to 
climate change. This will be done through improving access to agro -
meteorological services, improving production and management techniques 
through intensifying and diversifying crop cultivation with inclusion of high -
value nutritious crops under rice  based cropping system, along the supply 
chain, and introducing risk transfer schemes for key supply chain actors.  
 
9) Empower marginalized communities:  The 8FYP illustrates Bangladesh’s 
strong progress over the years in terms of eliminating legal barriers a nd 
introducing an enabling environment to improve the welfare of persons with 
disability (PWD) and other vulnerable communities. Included is the 
implementation of the Constitution which provides equal rights and 
opportunities to all citizens irrespective o f race, religion, caste, creed, or 
profession. Bangladesh’s measures in eliminating all legal and regulatory 
barriers to inclusion and for building affirmative action in its social 
development policies to protect social inclusion is an example. The MCPP 
aims to support locally led adaptation actions for the most disadvantaged 
communities. Measures that consider the needs and appropriateness of 
these communities remain a core functional requirement in this track. At a 
local scale, climate -proof adaptation te chnologies that draw examples from 
grounded research with local communities remain key to more equitable, 
effective, and sustainable adaptation. 
  
10) Ensuring power and energy security:  Power and energy security is a driving 
force for Bangladesh’s future and remains a key priority in the 8FYP. The 
Government will continue taking major steps to ensure uninterrupted power 
supply through increased installed generation capacity, an expanded 
transmission and distribution network, reduced system loss, increased 
electricity coverage, a greater share of renewable energy, and a cost-effective 
cross-border energy trade. The MCPP outlines specific measures to position 
Bangladesh towards a maximized share of renewable energy, energy Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 7  
 
efficiency and energy storage infrastruc ture taking advantage of the 
deflationary price trajectory of domestic renewable electricity generation and 
storage. Bangladesh will pursue accelerated grid modernization and ancillary 
market development in order for the power system to take advantage of rapid 
technological advancements to improve cost -competitiveness and socio -
economic outcomes. This will enable adequate grid investment, reduction of 
broader infrastructure risks, protection from spiking fossil fuel prices and 
reduced pricing impacts.  
 
11) Tackling climate change, managing disasters, and protecting the 
environment: The 8FYP is the first step in implementing the comprehensive 
delta management plan, the BDP 2100. Financing for this is to be sourced 
from global multilateral organizations and entit ies that work bilaterally. The 
MCPP identifies anticipatory and comprehensive investments including 
climate and disaster risk financing and insurance. This will enable a cost -
effective investment mix in adaptation measures (soft and hard engineering), 
risk retention, risk financing instruments such as risk transfer, contingent 
credit lines, catastrophe bonds and risk management. Residual risk can be 
reduced through early warning systems and communications, and loss and 
damage funds or endowment funds.   
 
 
The Mujib Vision and Measures 
  
With the advent of the birth centenary of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh 
Mujibur Rahman, Bangladesh finds itself at a crossroads. The MCCP e choes the 
sentiments of the Father of the Nation at the United Nations on 23 September 1974, 
“Our aim is to achieve self -dependence.” Bangladesh is severely threatened by the 
constant and increasingly devastating impact of climate change that already 
significantly curtails the nation’s development. Unchecked, global warming could 
permanently erode and submerge a significant share of the country’s territory, an 
affront to the future of the nation itself, and ecosystems integral to the planet. By 
degree of exposure and density of population, Bangladesh is one of the world’s most 
climate vulnerable nations.  
  
Bangladesh, however, is also resilient. Despite rapidly accelerating climate impacts 
and the serious health and economic shocks of the COVID-19 pandemic, Bangladesh 
continues to chart a robust economic development trajectory and serves as one of the 
primary engines of the global economy. Yet, Bangladesh, in the vision of the Father of 
the Nation, can and must further strengthen its resilience to overcome the gr eater 
challenges in store ahead. It should chart the swiftest and most sustainable and 
resilient pathway to prosperity in fulfillment of the independence of Bangladesh as a 
major 21st century leader for the world. The MCPP is launched under Bangladesh’s 
second tenure as president of the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) in line with whose 
vision Bangladesh aims to pursue and highlight the possibilities of a more prosperous 
and sustainable future for all. 8 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
 
While the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) orientates climate action around 
commitments to cut emissions and to take other actions, the MCPP is instead a 
strategy that explores the possibilities and potential to deliver robust socio-economic 
development while simultaneously maximizing our climate re silience and various 
green growth opportunities. It will lay out the funding needs required from 
international, regional, public and private sources, as well as how the local economy 
can contribute, if the elements of the MCPP’s vision for the future are  to actually be 
realized.  
 
Bangladesh is also ready to chart an ambitious course to a resilient and sustainable 
future. Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina, the Honorable Prime Minister of Bangladesh has 
said: “The time to save the planet is not tomorrow, but to day”. This spirit of urgency 
and action which is also supported by the Bangladesh Parliament’s declaration of 
climate change as a “planetary emergency” in November 2019 highlights that the 
planet faces a series of converging crises, all on the same timeline — global warming, 
disasters, extreme weather events, biodiversity loss, acidification of oceans, water 
stress and food insecurity. To combat this “on a war footing” is to build on the key 
national development planning process including the Eighth Five Ye ar Plan 202 0–
2025 of Bangladesh, Vision 2041 and Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, Bangladesh 
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, National Adaptation Plan  (NAP), and the 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 2021. The MCPP’s principal aims are to 
secure prosperity of Bangladesh and its people for the future with investment within 
this decade, through measures that: 
 
Boost Resilient and Green Growth through Maximal Resilience: Rendering the people 
and economy of Bangladesh maximally resilient to climate change, reducing losses to 
GDP, and so maximizing Bangladesh’s GDP growth beyond reference targets for 
economic growth. These measures will include empowering locally led action 
including gender responsiveness, strengthening the digital economy, increase d risk-
adjusted returns via enhanced financial protections, expanding economic 
partnerships and leveraging higher levels of international and domestic investment 
and green commerce, smoothing any adverse impacts of emerging from least 
developed country sta tus, and advancing Bangladesh’s attainment of upper middle -
income status in a decade. 
 
Drive support through Locally Led Adaptation Hubs to Support the Most Vulnerable: 
We will operationalize systematic financing to minimize and avert loss and damage 
including internal displacement through the Locally Led Adaptation Hubs. These hubs 
will support high levels of resilience and gender -responsive opportunities to enhance 
climate adaptation and counteract internal migration.  
 
Optimize Climate and Disaster Risk Management and Loss and Damage Financing: 
A comprehensive program of financial and social protection including the elimination 
of extreme poverty by 2030. This milestone will be reached through the Climate and 
Disaster Risk Management and Financing Strategy. We experience economic and non- Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 9  
 
economic loss and damage due to globally inadequate emission reduction measures. 
Increased action to avert, minimize and address impacts and loss and damage 
requires dedicated financing mechanisms and allocations.  
 
Promote Well -Being and Traditional Living:  Leveraging 21st-century technologies 
through Climate Resilient Technology Park for technology transfer together with an 
inherently sustainable traditional lifestyle while safeguarding and promoting physical 
and psychological well-being. This would entail green quality of life such as cleaner 
air, green health programs, greatly enhanced mobility for all, special support 
arrangements for the most vulnerable and marginal groups, including women, and 
people living with disab ility or mental illness. It would further entail green health 
programs; developing medicines for climate -related diseases and ultimately 
eradicating extreme poverty and exceeding key Sustainable Development Goal (SDGs) 
targets by 2030. 
 
Deliver Resilient E nergy Systems:  Ensuring energy systems are resilient to the 
impacts of climate change and securing energy resilience to be built for the climate 
of the future through transforming Bangladesh from a net importer of energy to a net 
exporter, leveraging domestic energy reso urces to the maximum, and becoming a 
leading global and regional participant in the green economy (hydrogen, supply chains, 
high-value nature-based agriculture). Strengthening the current account balance and 
reducing imported price volatility and inflation  risk by minimizing energy imports, 
expanding green exports, and enabling green commerce including through flagship 
energy projects such as the Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array , one of the first 
large scale hybrid RE-adaptation infrastructure projects and strategic. 
           
Strengthen Employment in a Green Economy:  Protecting workers and businesses 
from the harms of climate change by greatly increasing the level of protection. On top 
of that measure would be generating more aggregate employment than reference 
economic targets through strategic green job growth, lowering the level of 
unemployment, and ensuring upskilling of the workforce to high quality green tech 
jobs. Equally important is markedly increasing protective measures against the rising 
workplace heat that exposes indoor and outdoor workers to severe health and 
productivity risks.  
 
The MCPP will be achieved within the framework of national planning processes and 
will further strengthen the already -foreseen actions of: the 8th Five Year Pl an, 
Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, Vision 2041 , Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and 
Action Plan, National Adaptation Plan, Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework and 
Nationally Determined Contributions 202 1. The MCPP will be within the bounds of 
existing fiscal strategies, while optimizing them for resilience and sustainability and 
ensuring continued ongoing debt sustainability for Bangladesh. The MCPP prioritizes 
green growth approaches and public -private partnerships (PPP) as a key element in 
climate inves tment. The strategic  channelling of green financing and policy shifts 
through the principal aims could create a multiplier effect: reviving the economy, 
investing in projects to help the country prepare for the impending challenges of 10 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
climate change while creating jobs, jump-starting the economy, and building a more 
equitable society.  
 
The MCPP will support robust delivery of the 2030 UN Sustainable Development 
Agenda for Bangladesh in addition to an ambitious, accelerated implementation of the 
Paris Agr eement on Climate Change towards which the MCPP also serves as the 
nation’s long-term low GHG emissions and climate resilient development strategies. 
With a primary focus to 2030, the MCPP also incorporates strategic perspectives 
extending beyond 2040 to the mid-century. 
 
The MCPP will be implemented by concerned ministries as per rules of business. The 
investment in the MCPP will be coordinated and overseen by the Ministry of Finance 
in coordination with Ministry of Planning and relevant concerned ministries, and 
supported by  a special committee which can include representatives of each 
concerned ministry, PPP Authority, the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority 
(BIDA), Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics and CVF/V20 representatives from the 
Government of Bangladesh. An Advisory Board with consultative status comprising 
key private -sector industries represented by leaders in companies and business 
chambers in Bangladesh to complement and reinforce investment and partnership 
efforts. Progress and monitoring will be completed by the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics that will complete an annual assessment for submission to the Min istry of 
Finance, Ministry of Planning and relevant concerned ministries. 
 
 
New Hallmark Initiatives within the MCPP            
 
Bangladesh already pursues and works to complete a number of key national planning 
processes. The MCPP is specific to the green growth and climate change agenda and 
to securing Bangladesh’s prosperity and independence path amid the major and 
rapidly increasing threats of global climate change. The MCPP proposes a number of 
hallmarks, new initiatives that will help to anchor the MCPP and accomplish its goals 
and objectives.  Such key initial initiatives include: 
 
● Locally Led Adaptation Hubs:  To avert or minimize impacts and loss and 
damage requires fund  and ded icated financing mechanism, as well as 
unlocking local -level leadership through the establishment and capacity 
building of hubs for climate change adaptation in the most vulnerable 
communities of Bangladesh. The Hubs aim to support high degrees of 
resilience and gender-responsive focus, creating local opportunities for 
prosperity to counteract climate -induced internal migration, promote the 
effective management and leveraging of public resources for adaptation, and 
the adoption of the Kampala Principles for effective private sector development 
cooperation.  
 
● Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk Management and Financing 
Strategy: The application of a comprehensive set of climate and disaster risk Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 11  
 
financing and insurance (CDRFI) instruments and a strategy for their utilization 
to close the financial protection gap will be instrumental for achieving 
resilience and enabling adaptation investments. A key component of the 
strategy includes a transformation in poverty reduction and social inclusion 
through the delivery of Adaptive Social Protection (ASP). The strategy can be 
supported by the V20 collaboration on a global public -private partnership for 
analytics to close the protection gap. With support from the G20+ and V20 
InsuResilience Global Partnership, the d ifferent CDRFI instruments can 
complement and enable the resourcing of adaptation investments.   
 
● Resilient Well -Being Programs:  The MCPP will support a strengthening of 
disability-inclusive, gender -responsive national initiatives in the domain of 
mental health and well-being, including crisis preparedness and management 
for mental health training and capacity programs, trauma counseling, 
educational and child support programs, and general well-being and awareness 
programs in support of healthy, sustainable and traditional lifestyles.  
 
● Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array:  A 4-gigawatt wind generation array 
network linked to a mangrove green belt.  This would be one of the first large 
scale hybrid RE -adaptation infrastructure projects. It would b e sited offshore 
on the Bay of Bengal shelf, harvesting renewable energy to meet the nation’s 
rapid energy growth and backstopping national energy security, while enabling 
coastal resilience outcomes through the mangrove green belt. 
 
● Strategic Energy Hubs:  A strategic program of reconversion of coal, oil, and 
diesel thermal power plants together with workforce upskilling to act as high -
tech green hydrogen production facilities, and waste-to-energy/biomass power 
plants, interconnected with Bangladesh’s growi ng LNG/natural gas network. 
This will reinforce grid stability, provide cleaner -burning fuels and develop a 
new, high-value strategic export product in the form of green hydrogen from 
renewable sources. 
 
 
Climate Change and Carbon Intensive Loss Impacts 
 
Bangladesh’s high vulnerability to climate change can be attributed to a number of 
topographic, hydro -geological, and socio -economic factors. They include its 
geographical position in South Asia, its flat deltaic topography with low elevation, its 
extreme exposure to climate variability, its high population density and incidence of 
chronic/abject poverty, and its greater dependency on an agrarian economy for 
incomes and employment, which in turn is severely affected by a capricious climate.  
 
Bangladesh’s geographical characteristics are intricately linked to local and regional 
hydrological characteristics that rely on climatic processes, including seasonality. 
Bangladesh is at risk of natural disasters such as riverine and flash floods, tropic al 
cyclones, storm surges, droughts, salinity intrusions, sea level rise, and riverbank and 12 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
coastal erosion. Flooding of various types, cyclones, and droughts is common. Many 
parts of Bangladesh’s economy and society are severely affected by climate change  
including water resources, agriculture and forestry, food security, human health, and 
infrastructure.  
 
Climate change has the greatest impact on human settlement, causing mass 
displacement of inhabitants and loss of livelihood. Some 22 –30% of the country  is 
usually inundated by heavy rainfall during the monsoon season, while a major flood 
may inundate two-thirds of the country.4 Climate change will deplete capital stock in 
the construction sector by 0.05% annually until 2100.  
 
A rise in sea levels and c oastal erosion could lead to a loss of 4 percent or 
approximately 1500 sq km in near term, 6 percent or approximately 2300 sq km and 
by the end of the century around 10 to 15 percent of land surface and 30% food 
production by 2050. Up to one-third of Bangladesh’s population is estimated to be at 
risk of displacement because of rising sea levels. A study of sea level rise scenarios 
by the Bangladesh Ministry of Finance projects the annual cost from loss of capital 
and reduced economic activity could range between 1.49% and 3.02% of GDP by 2031, 
with significant job losses.  
 
The International Labour Organization ( ILO) notes that the impact of rising heat on 
exposed indoor and outdoor workers already reduces Bangladesh’s annual economic 
output potential by a pproximately 4% of GDP and will continue to grow if not 
addressed. Moreover, the increasing intensity and frequency of natural disasters 
would also divert limited revenue away from growth -enhancing investment to 
emergency relief.5  
 
It is safe to say that climate change has been a threat multiplier in Bangladesh as the 
country continues to experience unprecedented impacts and losses from the 
phenomenon. Climate change is now a growing humanitarian crisis for the country. 
Bangladesh has therefore placed bui lding adaptive capacities and adaptation at the 
very core of climate policies and plans.  
 
The second Climate Vulnerability Monitor published in 2012 found that Bangladesh 
will face losses of up to 6.8% GDP by 2030, with a carbon -intensive losses of 0.5% of 
GDP by 2030. Emissions have gone up significantly over the past decade, with the 
 
4  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Chang e, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
(MOEFCC). (June 2018). Third National Communication of Bangladesh to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. UNFCCC. Retrieved February 15, 2021, from      
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/TNC%20Report%20%28Low%20Resolation%29%2003_01_2019.p
df 
5 International Monetary Fund (IMF). (2019, September 18). Bangladesh: Selected Issues ( Country Report No. 
19/300). International Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Country Reports . Retrieved February 15, 2021, from 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2019/09/17/Bangladesh-Selected-Issues-48683 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 13  
 
World Meteorological Organization predicting a 20% probability that temperatures will 
exceed the 1.5 °C threshold of the Paris Agreement, it is likely Bangladesh will face 
higher GDP losses in 2030 and beyond. Moreover, an increase of one degree Celsius 
would increase the frequency of lightning strikes by 12% over the century. 6 
 
And considering that solar power prices have fallen 82% since 2010 and 18% between 
2018 and 2019, along with concentrated solar power falling 47%, onshore wind by 39% 
and offshore wind by 29%, coupled with the inflationary pressure and volatility of fossil 
fuel prices, Bangladesh will face higher GDP losses in 2030 and beyond by locking in 
carbon assets.   
 
The combined effect of climate change and carbon -intensive loss impacts may raise 
average yearly mortality by 150,000 by 2030 with about 55 million people impacted by 
climate change by 2030. 7 By 2050, climate change could make another 14% of t he 
country “extremely vulnerable” to floods and displace some 35 million people from 
coastal districts. 8 Women are disproportionately vulnerable to these effects with a 
larger share of the burden falling on them.  
 
Table 1. Climate Change and Carbon-Intensive Loss Impacts and Effects9 
Impact Effect 
Heat stress 4.9% in GDP losses by 2030 
At least USD 30 billion losses per year by 2030 
4.84% working hours lost by 2030 
3.83 million full-time jobs lost by 2030 
Outdoor and indoor pollution USD 2.3 billion losses per year 
USD 2100 daily adjusted life year cost per capita (PPP)  
Climate-induced disasters (e.g., 
drought, floods, and storms) 
USD 4.075 billion losses per year by 2030 
 
6 Romps, D. M., Seeley, J. T., Vollaro, D., & Mo linari, J. (2014). Projected increase in lightning strikes in the United 
States due to global warming. Science, 346(6211), 851–854. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259100  
7 Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) and Fundación Dara Internacional (DARA) (2012). Climate Vulnerability Monitor, 
2nd Edn.: A Guide to the Cold Calculus of A Hot Planet. Retrieved February 16, 2021, from      
https://thecvf.org/resources/publications/climate-vulnerability-monitor-2012/ 
8 Devnath, A. (2020, May 6). Cyclone Shows Cost of Delaying $38 Billion Bangladesh Delta Plan. Bloomberg Quint. 
Retrieved February 16, 2021, from https://www.bloombergquint.com/onweb/cyclone-shows-cost-of-delaying-38-
billion-bangladesh-delta-plan  
9 Summarized using above mentioned data and sources. 14 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Habitat losses (e.g., labor 
productivity and sea level rise) 
USD 50.62 billion losses per year by 2030 
  
Sea level rise and coastal erosion 
  
4% loss of land surface by 2050 
30% loss of food production by 2050 
Sea-level rise 
  
One-third of Bangladesh population at risk of 
displacement by 2100 
1.49% and 3.02% in GDP losses per year by 2031 
Heavy rainfall during monsoon 
season 
22–30% (regular floods) up to 67% (major floods) of the 
country inundated 
Increased intensity and frequency 
of natural disasters 
Diversion of limited revenue away from growth-
enhancing development investment to emergency relief  
Increasing frequency of lightning 
strikes 
An increase of one degree Celsius would increase the 
frequency of lightning strikes by 12% over the century. 
Climate change capital stock Impact of climate change capital stock in the 
construction sector would be depleted by 0.05% 
annually until 2100 
  
Climate change and carbon 
intensive loss 
150,000 deaths added to the yearly average by 2030 
55 million people affected by 2030* 
6.8% in GDP loss by 2030 with a carbon intensive loss 
impact of 0.5% of GDP by 2030 
Climate change Additional 14% of the country “extremely vulnerable” to 
floods could dislocate more than 35 million people by 
2050 
*Women are disproportionately impacted by climate change Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 15  
 
Introduction to The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan  
 
The Climate Prosperity Plan responds to the urgent need for Climate Vulnerable Forum 
(CVF) member countries and the Vulnerable Group of Twenty (V20) to attract new 
investment to drive prosperity through the coming decade on the frontlines of a 
planetary climate emergency.  
 
These country -led strategic investment plans put socio -economic gains first while 
simultaneously embedding climate -resilient and zero - or low - carbon outcomes as 
intrinsic elements of “climate smart” and “green growth” design. Prosperity in the 21st 
century demands the integration of economic and climate agendas, presenting new 
opportunities to drive truly resilient growth. Climate Prosperity Plans are designed to 
extend finance mobilization across a range of sources for CVF/V20 infrastructure and 
economic programs. These programs will promote robust socio -economic progress 
and reduce emissions while building greater climate and disaster resilience, 
safeguarding both SDGs progress to 2030 and macroeconomic stability. 
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan is the first CVF and V20 investment plan to specify 
a decade to achieve climate prosperity and enhanced macroeconomic management 
at the conclusion of the Mujib Year.  In sum, the CVF and V20 plans aim to drive 
planetary prosperity.  They will include analysis of the benefits for job growth, 
economic growth, environmental, and health benefits that would be realized if the 
projects in the plans are financed and implemente d. They are structured with four 5 -
year cycles with provision for stocktaking and progress review at the midpoint of each 
cycle and mid -term evaluation upon completion of the first cycle. The plans include 
key projects from Bangladesh’s existing national plans and seek to finance these and 
other similar adaptation, climate -resilient, renewable, low -carbon infrastructure and 
projects. It is important to note that the plan is considered a living document, and will 
be updated every 5 years to take into conside ration the evolving technology learning 
rates and access to resources. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 16 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
The New Economic Vision for People-Centric Resilient Growth 
 
The factors that affect vulnerable countries such as Bangladesh will increasingly 
affect the world economy. Avoidance of future macro -catastrophic risks is key to 
maintaining or overshooting our economic trajectory. Chief among these is climate 
risk that will require science to be at the core of our strategic and investment 
decisions. Recalibrating markets, technology, and finance towards more resilient and 
sustainable economic futures is urgently needed. Progress to achieve a strong, 
resilient, inclusive, and sustainable growth trajectory for Bangladesh should be 
achievable while accelerating efforts that defuse climate-disruptive risks of all kinds, 
prioritizing climate -resilient and low or zero carbon efforts while also maximizing 
economic growth, socio-economic benefits, and galvanizing SDGs progress. 
 
We seek to improve our key socio-economic growth outcomes including national and 
disposable income, poverty reduction, investment, jobs, economic stability, trade 
balance, and other critical socio -economic results by optimizing core economic and 
climate responses within the real economy. In pursuing climate prosperity, we aim to 
meet, exceed, or ensure early achievement of the 2030 SDGs and be well on track to 
emerge, at the latest by 2030 -50, as wealthy, climate-smart nations via the strongest 
possible economic growth and designed to be climate-smart. 
 
A new financing paradigm is emerging: While income, revenue, and profits matter, 
physical climate and transition risk cannot be ignored. As we build back stronger, the 
economic paradigm of the last century must be changed by compelling polluters to 
value po verty reduction, modernized job opportunities, improved trade and 
macroeconomic stability. This improved economic vision will be supported by climate 
risk governance and reporting to identify and assess climate -related risks and 
opportunities that will inf luence the investment strategy of the government and 
market participants.  
 
Climate vulnerable developing countries are burdened with a high cost of capital that 
undermines their capacity to develop low-carbon and climate resilient projects. There 
is also a compounding lack of investment in climate change action. An important 
element of this persistent investment gap is the perception of greater risk and 
associated high cost of financing in developing countries — especially for low-carbon 
and climate resilient infrastructure, modernized technology and adaptation projects. 
 
Many climate -resilient and low -carbon projects have higher capital intensity than 
traditional infrastructure. For example, an adaptation project (e.g., critical 
infrastructure with climate  protection like seawalls or storm drainage) may have 
additional costs in year one but enjoy lower operations and maintenance costs over 
time compared to infrastructure without resilient attributes. Similarly, a renewable 
energy project may have a higher u pfront cost, but lower operating costs than a coal 
plant of equal output. As small changes in interest rates have compounding effects 
on project costs over time, lowering financing costs can therefore have significant 
price benefits for project end -beneficiaries (electricity customers, farmers using Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 17  
 
resilient irrigation infrastructure and so on). This Climate Prosperity Plan hinges on 
providing a lower cost of capital or a high level of concessionality, especially for 
adaptation and climate-resilient projects.       
 
Moreover, with reference to the Paris Agreement (Article 4, Paragraph 19), the Mujib 
Climate Prosperity Plan reflect our communication for long-term low greenhouse gas 
emission development strategies, mindful of Article 2 to address cost of capital issues 
and mobilize international, regional, and domestic capital.  
 
Summary of Climate Prosperity Outcomes 
 
The MCPP estimates that investment in resilient pathways including energy, water, 
transport, supply chains, value chains, and so on will en tail costs of at least USD 90 
billion by 2030, with incremental gains of over USD 50 billion to be added to GDP 
versus business as usual, yielding value of over USD 850 billion over 10 years. Delaying 
these investments in infrastructure and adaptive capaci ty would result in costs and 
losses of at least 4.9% of GDP by 2030, equivalent to at least USD 30 billion per year 
by 2030.  
 
Socio-economic outcomes expected by 2030  
1) Elimination of extreme poverty by 2030  
2) Enhanced climate risk adjusted returns for micr o, small and medium 
enterprises of 10% by 2025 and 20% by 2030, especially for women -owned 
and women-run enterprises. 
3) Reduced climate-induced migration by 2030  
4) 4.1 million new climate-resilient jobs and unemployment reduced to 3.9% 
5) GDP growth of 9% with a GDP per capita increase of 137% by 2030, 
equivalent to USD 4,400, reaching upper middle-income status as per Vision 
204110 
6) At least USD 30 billion in net savings or avoided losses per year by 2030 
7) Cumulative revenue potential of up to USD 16 billion 
8) Reduced volatility and improved cost -effectiveness with savings of 30% in 
the power sector 
9) Improved trade balance of over USD 8 billion surplus by 2025 and up to USD 
15 billion by 2030 
10) Improved quality of life through clean air, safer workplaces, and bett er 
mobility 
 
10 It is important to note that the COVID-19 crisis has led to GDP growth of 6.8% in 2021 and 7.2% in 2022.The 
8FYP targets 8.5% GDP growth by 2025 which is to be achieved with 75% of the total investment needs to be 
generated from the private sector. A maximized scenario of new investment o pportunities is consequently 
expected to raise GDP growth by 0.5% from the 8FYP to 9% by 2030. 18 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
11) Economic partnerships strengthened with countries aligned with 
safeguarding the 1.5 -degree limit of the Paris Agreement  by up to 10% in 
2025 and by up to 30% by 2030. 
12) Increase economic empowerment of women through increase in quality 
participation in the labor force, reduced vulnerability and increased 
decision-making authority and financial autonomy of women 
13) Doubled agriculture productivity and reduced GHG emission to remain 
competitive with new green markets by 2030  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 19  
 
 
Figure 3 20 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
SECTION 2. KEY PRIORITY AREAS 
 
The impact of climate-fueled disasters are made more intense and more frequent due 
to failure to reduce global emissions. This current toolkit of standard macroeconomic 
‘fixes’ may not ensure stability in an era of global physical shocks. Systematic climate 
risk management for policies and project s is essential, but it needs better climate 
data, tools and resilience planning. Efficient and prepared government institutions 
matter, as sectoral and cross -sectoral climate -centered policies and investment. 
Governments must continue to enable and reinfor ce climate -informed macro -level 
analysis via research such as whole -of-economy modelling of climate impacts, debt 
sustainability analysis, public expenditure review and poverty diagnostics11. 
  
More importantly, greater internal coherence is key to stronge r climate action – that 
is, the recognition that supply, demand, and development outcomes will hinge on the 
management of climate risk across sectors and levels of government. Consequently, 
the baking-in of climate risk in local and national plans, evidenced by explicit pathways 
for agriculture, infrastructure, and the like. Robust ownership follows more easily from 
greater internal coherence. Robust ownership of climate action (rather than a 
compliance response) can speed up the enabling of adaptation and resilience. 
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan aims to support efforts of Bangladesh in 
mainstreaming climate change (with a focus on adaptation and resilience) in 
economic planning through innovative mainstreaming tools and approaches which 
ensure that climate change is factored into growth and development strategies. Such 
strategies include green growth infrastructure and access as well as a greener and 
healthier society.  
 
Bangladesh has made strides in integrating climate adaptation and resilience into 
long-term planning through the Climate Fiscal Framework which determines: (1) an 
equitable division of climate funds and their allocation to relevant sectors; (2) division 
of services, identification of the demand for climate fund, and expe nditure areas of 
financial authority for raising revenue, for national and international financing options, 
and for fiscal tools; and (3) governance framework for climate change funds under 
national fiscal policy.    
 
This section comprises 6 key priority areas of the MCPP, incorporating four scenarios: 
● Business-As-Usual (BAU): Uses the reference scenario based on the  Vision 
2041. 
 
11 Monsod, T.C., Solon, O.J.C., Gochoco -Bautista, M.S., de Dios, E.S., Capuno, J.J., Abrenica, M.J.V., Arcena, A.L., 
Epetia, M.A., Escresa, L.C., Jandoc, K.,  Kraft, A.D., Magno, C., & Reside, R.E. Jr. (April 2020). Surviving the Lockdown 
and Beyond (Discussion Paper No. 2020-04). University of the Philippines School of Economics Discussion Papers. 
Retrieved February 16, 2021, from https://econ.upd.edu.ph/dp/index.php/dp/article/view/1527 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 21  
 
● Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC): Based on the first NDC (Update) 
submitted in 2021 . It is important to note this will be updated as NDC 
submissions continue to be updated. 
● Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan (MCPP): Realistic climate prosperity scenario 
based on current and expected prospective access to resources and support. 
● Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Maximized (MCPP -M): M aximized climate 
prosperity scenario based on a significant increase in resources made 
available both from international support and the private sector (domestic, 
regional, and international). 22 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Key Priority Areas 1. Accelerated Adaptation 
 
Green Financing to Promote Green Growth, Accelerated Adaptation and Protective 
Infrastructure in line with 8FYP and Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100  
 
We will invest in green growth, adapted and protective infrastructure to strengthen 
resilience, including green growth infrastructure and access. There will be a focus on 
the green growth and adaptation projects and programs in the 8FYP and Bangladesh 
Delta Plan 2100 (BDP2100). 
 
Box 1. Special Focus: Accelerated Adaptation - Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 
There will be a special focus on inland and coastal flooding, including natural flood 
management measures in line with the 8FYP and BDP 2100, towards a prosperous delta. 
Mitigating flood risks in urban areas lowers financial costs, increases security, and makes 
feasible investments that would otherwise be too vulnerable to climate risks. All in all, a key 
benefit of more resilient infrastructure is more reliable services, that crowd -in investment 
and economic development. This has a positive effect not only on businesses but also on 
households that can improve their productivity and living standards.   
 
Bangladesh Delta 2100 (BDP 2100) is a shift in the economic vision towards resilience to 
climate-driven disasters such as cyclones and flooding. It addresses impacts such as 
temperature rise, erratic rainfall patterns, and sea level rise through enhanced and adaptive 
delta management (ADM). It aims to eliminate poverty by 2030 on a path to prosperity by 
2041.  
 
The implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 prioritizes the use of public-private 
partnerships (PPP) as a key method to enable investment. By leveraging private and public 
funds, projects are able to increase both the sources and overall levels of financing. Another 
promising way of scaling institutional investment is to expand investment options through 
financial instruments such as blended funds and green financing up to 2030 and expanding 
the toolkit to include resilience bonds up to 2041 and beyond. Resilience bonds are at the 
intersection of social bonds and sustainability bonds. They can be designed to complement 
respond to acute needs such as emergency medical equipment, social protection programs 
for vulnerable households, and rapid financing for communities and MSMEs, as well as for 
medium-term to long -term needs such as resilient hospital infrastructure, supply chains, 
basic infrastructure (water, sanitation renewable energy, etc.), logistics, urban services, and 
increased agricultural productivity with safe and nutr itious food supply. Securitizing an 
asset pool of Bangladesh infrastructure and issuing green financing tools such resilience 
bonds can transform Bangladesh infrastructure projects into low-risk, liquid assets that are 
attractive to institutional investors. Backing resilience bonds with the credit rating of issuing 
institutions such as the Asian Development Bank and World Bank Group further reduces 
the risk of such bonds.  
 
To accelerate the financing of the BDP 2100 phase 1, as highlighted in 8FYP, resilie nce 
bonds can enable an alternative financing avenue for sovereigns and corporates through 
capital markets for the portfolio within Phase 1 up to 2030. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 23  
 
Specifically, by leveraging multilateral development bank 
resources and the development of equity and debt 
instruments by state -owned investment vehicles, 
multilateral development banks and other development 
finance institutions would support investments that yield 
a “triple dividend” of 1) reduced  pandemic risk, 2) 
economic recovery and growth, and 3) climate resilience. 
  
   
There is a clear opportunity to invest in green growth and climate -resilient 
infrastructure to improve adaptation, avoiding further losses and reaping net benefits. 
The benefits of such investments are estimated to be four times the cost.12  
 
Below is an overview of actions that development partners and the private sector 
could deploy within a COVID -19 stimulus package to improve health, the economy, 
and climate adaptation. It is important to note that developing a pipeline of resilient 
infrastructure projects, and better taxonomies and standards for a common language 
and understanding, is key for the prioritization of public investments and the 
structuring of financial instruments. 
 
For example, water resilience in Banglades h needs to be integrated at the basin, city, 
and utility level to ensure adaptation measures for water systems integrate with other 
urban services and are effective. Water utilities and service providers, in particular, 
need to have sustainable and resilie nt water resources management to ensure 
continuity of water supply and to provide safe and secure water. Policy and investment 
interventions to improve access to clean water and sanitation must be a critical 
component of any stimulus package. It must optim ize water management for the 
effective distribution, especially for women, and use of water in human settlements, 
agriculture and industry, and support enhanced water governance through improved 
cooperation frameworks within and across the region. 
 
Scaling up resilient infrastructure can provide both the source of and support for 
economic growth and job creation, removing barriers to adaptation and pandemic 
recovery. Adaptation solutions are employment -intensive and have a high return on 
investment, making them an excellent tool to overcome the current economic crisis 
while safeguarding livelihoods.  
 
As with climate and health responses, the current crisis is also an opportunity for the 
adaptation community to explore ways to expand the application of digit al solutions. 
These have already proven effective for enhancing climate -health information 
 
12  Mena-Carrasco, M. & Dufey, A. (2021, January 14). A Green and Resilient Recovery for Latin America. 
Comunidad de Estados Latinoamericanos y Caribeños (CELAC), Secretaria De Relaciones Exteriores (SRE), Global 
Center  on Adaptation (GCA). Retrieved May 31, 2021, from https://gca.org/reports/a-green-and-resilient-recovery-
for-latin-america/ 24 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
exchange, reducing the impact of extreme weather events, and for improving food 
security.13 
 
The opportunity to lessen and diffuse a compound climate -COVID crisis by  
supplementing emergency medical assistance to fight the COVID -19 pandemic with 
policy action that is optimized to strengthen resilience for critical climate, economic 
and pandemic risks, is reflected in the table below. Measures to build climate 
resilience across a range of key sectors of development bring clear direct and indirect 
benefits to tackling the COVID pandemic and its impact, and for recovering from this 
crisis.  In the immediate pandemic response and for the recovery, example measures 
with triplicate benefits for tackling climate change, COVID and pandemic risk, and in 
support of economic recovery.  
 
Sector-based Resilience Measures 
Sector Example Measure by Policy Target Resilience Dual-Dividend SDG 
Benefit 
Sendai 
framework 
COVID-19 
Response 
Pandemic 
Resilience 
Post-Crisis 
Recovery 
Pandemic Climate 
Digital 
Economy 
Internet 
access and 
digital tools 
Internet 
access and 
digital tools 
Internet 
access and 
digital tools 
E-commerce, 
tracking tools 
and 
information 
sharing 
Disaster and 
climate data 
access 
9 - 
Disaster Risk 
Reduction 
 
  Financial 
protection: 
infrastructure 
insurance 
Financial 
protection: 
infrastructure 
insurance 
Recovery less 
exposed to 
disaster risks 
Communitie
s rebuild 
faster 
11 Priority 3 
Investing in 
disaster risk 
reduction 
for resilience 
Emergency 
preparedness 
(e.g., early 
warning 
systems) 
Emergency 
preparedness 
(e.g., early 
warning 
systems) 
Emergency 
preparedness 
(e.g., early 
warning 
systems) 
Reduced 
transmission 
following 
disasters 
Reduced 
exposure of 
populations 
to hazards 
3 Priority 4 
Enhancing 
disaster 
preparedness 
for effective 
response, and 
to «Build Back 
Better» in 
 
13 Global Center on Adaptation (GCA) & African Adaptation Initiative (AAI). (2020, May 22).  Integrated Responses 
to Building Climate and Pandemic Resilience in Africa: A Policy Brief from Global Center on Adaptation and African 
Adaptation Initiative. Retrieved February 16, 2021, from https://gca.org/reports/integrated-responses-to-building-
climate-and-pandemic-resilence-in-africa/ Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 25  
 
Sector Example Measure by Policy Target Resilience Dual-Dividend SDG 
Benefit 
Sendai 
framework 
COVID-19 
Response 
Pandemic 
Resilience 
Post-Crisis 
Recovery 
Pandemic Climate 
recovery, 
rehabilitation 
and 
reconstruction 
Employment & 
Livelihoods 
 
Social safety 
nets (e.g., 
cash transfers, 
cash-for-work) 
Social safety 
nets (e.g., 
cash 
transfers, 
cash-for-
work) 
Social safety 
nets (e.g., 
cash transfers, 
cash-for-work) 
Reduced 
economic 
shock from 
pandemic 
response 
Reduced 
economic 
shock from 
climate 
hazards 
8, 1  
Labor heat 
stress 
measures 
Labor heat 
stress 
measures 
Labor heat 
stress 
measures 
Reduced 
illness 
susceptibility 
for pandemic 
disease and 
lost work 
Reduced 
heat-related 
illness and 
lost work 
8, 1  
Resilient 
Energy 
Infrastructure 
and Access 
Clean energy 
access 
Clean energy 
access 
Clean energy 
access 
Health 
system 
energy needs 
met; reduced 
respiratory 
disease 
Disaster 
resilience of 
energy 
systems 
7  
Food & 
Agriculture 
Disaster-
resilient 
agriculture 
Disaster-
resilient 
agriculture 
Disaster-
resilient 
agriculture 
Reduced 
pandemic 
food supply 
risk and 
recovery less 
exposed to 
disaster risks 
Reduced 
exposure of 
agriculture to 
climate 
hazards 
2  
Enhanced 
nutrition 
Enhanced 
nutrition 
Enhanced 
nutrition 
Reduced 
illness 
susceptibility 
for pandemic 
disease 
Reduced 
food 
insecurity 
during 
2 26 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Sector Example Measure by Policy Target Resilience Dual-Dividend SDG 
Benefit 
Sendai 
framework 
COVID-19 
Response 
Pandemic 
Resilience 
Post-Crisis 
Recovery 
Pandemic Climate 
climate 
shocks 
Health Financial 
protection: 
health 
insurance 
  Financial 
protection: 
health 
insurance 
Access to 
health 
services for 
pandemic 
disease 
Access to 
health 
services for 
climate-
sensitive 
diseases 
3  
Public 
healthcare 
services (with  
emphasis for 
agriculture 
sector) 
Public 
healthcare 
services 
Public 
healthcare 
services 
Access to 
health 
services for 
pandemic 
disease 
Access to 
health 
services for 
climate-
sensitive 
diseases 
(e.g., 
malaria) 
3  
Infrastructure   Financial 
protection: 
infrastructure 
insurance 
Financial 
protection: 
infrastructure 
insurance 
Recovery less 
exposed to 
disaster risks 
Communitie
s rebuild 
faster 
9  
Sanitation 
facilities 
Sanitation 
facilities 
Sanitation 
facilities 
Reduced 
transmission 
of pandemic 
disease 
Reduced 
transmission 
of climate -
sensitive 
disease (e.g., 
cholera) 
6  
Water Clean water 
access 
Clean water 
access 
Clean water 
access 
Reduced 
transmission 
of pandemic 
disease 
Reduced 
climate-
sensitive 
disease 
susceptibility 
and 
transmission 
6 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 27  
 
Sector Example Measure by Policy Target Resilience Dual-Dividend SDG 
Benefit 
Sendai 
framework 
COVID-19 
Response 
Pandemic 
Resilience 
Post-Crisis 
Recovery 
Pandemic Climate 
Forestry Restoration 
through 
reforestation 
and 
afforestation 
activities for 
supporting the 
communities’ 
livelihood 
Restoration of 
forest and 
biodiversity 
through 
reforestation 
and 
afforestation 
continues to 
develop 
resilient 
ecosystems 
and 
community 
Restore the 
forest and 
biodiversity to 
increase the 
ecosystem 
services and 
address 
climate 
change 
impacts 
Restore forest 
ecosystem to 
prevent 
spillover 
zoonotic 
diseases 
Carbon 
sequestratio
n through 
afforestation 
and 
reforestation 
15  
 
       
BDP 2100 projects include the blue economy, sustainable land use and spatial 
planning, agriculture and rural livelihoods, inland waterway transportation and urban 
water management, and renewable energy. Areas of investment include coastal zones 
(USD 11 bil lion), Barind14 & drought-prone (USD 2 billion), haor 15 & flash flood (USD 
350 million), Chattogram Hill Tracts (USD 750 million), river system & estuaries (USD 
6 billion), and urban areas (USD 8 billion), among others.    
Bangladesh Delta 2100 financed th rough green financing including resilience bonds 
can enable . . .  
Over USD 35 billion in 
investment to be mobilized 
by 2030 via low -cost 
international financing  
1.5 million additional job 
opportunities by 2025 and 3 
million additional job 
opportunities by 2030 
The delivery of SDGs 
outcomes through linkage 
and pricing of benefits  
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
 
14 Barind is a comparatively high, undulating, region with reddish and yellowish clay soils. 
 
15 Haor: A hoar is a wetland ecosystem in the north-eastern part of Bangladesh which physically is a bowl or saucer 
shaped shallow depression, also known as a backswamp. 28 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
2022 We will develop the analytical and guiding operational 
frameworks for development green financing issued by state-
owned vehicles, multilateral development banks (MDB) and 
development banks for enhanced financing to eligible private 
sector investments that contribute to increased climate 
resilience while also reducing pandemic risks. This would 
enable economic re covery, promote both climate -proof and 
pandemic risk-adjusted growth, with SDGs as key performance 
indicators. 
MoF 
2023 We will develop a green finance roadmap that leverages MDB 
support for elements of the MCPP and utilizes de -risking tools 
for credit strengthening. 
MoF 
2041 We will develop the analytical and guiding operational 
frameworks for development resilience bonds issued by state -
owned vehicles, multilateral development banks (MDB) and 
development banks for enhanced resilience -focused re source 
mobilization including to eligible private sector participants that 
contribute to increased climate resilience.  
MoF 
 
 
Bangladesh Delta 2100 is a direct investment measure that supports Covid -19 
Recovery Interventions16 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and 
Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Targets disadvantaged groups (e.g., 
women, rural, etc.) 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected 
by non-financial shocks 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Support for long-term transformation 
Positive environmental and social outcomes  
High employment intensity 
Contribution to the productive asset base 
High economic multiplier 
Positive environmental and social outcomes 
 
 
SDG… 
 
16 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 29  
 
SDG 1: No Poverty SDG 2: Zero Hunger SDG 3: Good Health and 
Well-Being 
SDG 5: Gender Equality 
 
SDG 6: Clean Water and 
Sanitation 
SDG 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDG 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
And Infrastructure 
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities 
and Communities  
SDG 13: Climate Action SDG 14: Life Below Water SDG 15: Life on Land 
SDG 17: Partnerships   
 
 
Key Measures 
Local-level integrated water management projects and studies of coastal areas as per 
BPD 2100 Phase 1  
Increase tree coverage from 22% to 25% by 2030      
Construction of the barrages as per BDP 2100  
Restore degraded forests in CHT and haor ecosystems 
Reduce/halt deforestation and forest degradation 
Afforestation in newly accreted char lands and coastal belts 
Infrastructure and water management projects for haor and flash -flood areas as per 
BDP 2100 Phase 1 
Rationalized water and polder projects in Chattogram Coastal plains  
National Rivers Stabilization and Land Reclamation Project  
Ecological restoration of river systems around Dhaka city 
Urban drainage network improvement and solid waste management projects in line 
with BDP 2100 phase 1 
Setup of flood and drought management center  
Improvement, expansion, and modification of the existing water resources 
infrastructure in drought-prone and Barind areas  
Improvement of the existing flood forecasting and early warning systems (e.g., cyclone 
and surge warnings) and strengthening dissemination mechanisms 30 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Restore, conserve biodiversity and genetic resources to support the development of 
resilient ecosystems 
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
Credit enhancement 
instruments 
Underwriting support  Industry capital investment 
and industry utilization Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 31  
 
Key Priority Areas  2. Just Transition of Labor and Future -Proofing 
Industry with Technology Transfer 
2A. Just Transition and Modernization through Training and Skills 
Development for Labor Markets of the Future 
 
The Just Transition can reduce future welfare liabilities and enhance tax revenue, 
while building Bangladesh’s ability to future-proof the workforce for green and resilient 
jobs to improve it s competitive positioning in the global supply chain. The cost of 
reskilling 3.83 million people could be as much as USD 1.5 billion up to 2030. 
 
Moreover, factors including increased frequency of heatwaves and high temperatures 
result in poor working cond itions and low labor productivity. In extreme cases, this 
could lead to deaths from heat stroke. Bangladesh is among the countries most 
affected by heat stress and stands to lose 4.84 % of total working hours to climate -
induced heat stress in 2030. This is  equivalent to 3.83 million full -time jobs in 2030 
and GDP losses of 4.9% by 2030. 17 Insulation and clean -energy heating, ventilation, 
and air -conditioning (HVAC) for buildings, especially workplaces, can help reduce 
losses and improve working conditions.  
  
Labor Force 
Resilience 
Scenario 1: 
100% Climate 
Resilient 
Scenario 2: 
50% Climate 
Resilient 
Scenario 3: 
25% Climate 
Resilient 
Avoided GDP 
losses in 2025 
(%) 
2.45 1.23 0.61 
Avoided GDP 
loss in 2030 (%) 
4.9 2.45 1.23 
 
 
Further, we will accelerate a just transition and modernization of the labor force to 
better compete in the labor markets of the future and pave the pathway toward the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution. This will include reskilling and upskilling via technical and 
vocational education and training, as well as through improved efficiency from the use 
of automation. We recognize the growing consequences of non-financial shocks and 
an increasingly competitive environment as companies’ future -proof their supply 
 
17 Star Business Report. (2019, July 3). Heat Stress cuts productivity, jobs: ILO. The Daily Star. Retrieved February 
17, 2021, from https://www.thedailystar.net/business/news/heat-stress-cut-productivity-jobs-ilo-
1765945#:~:text=Bangladesh%20may%20love%204.84%20percent,70%20percent%20during%20the%20period’ 32 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
chain with labor being a major input, reshaping labor markets. This reshaping exposes 
the vulnerability of lower -skilled employment especially in the manufacturing, 
agriculture, fisheries, service, and retail sectors.  
 
Skilled laborers are typically less vuln erable, so the upskilling of labor is in line with 
8FYP and key to the achievement of Vision 2041. While automation may reduce the 
number of some jobs, it will increase wealth creation. To ensure green job creation, it 
is essential to link the just transition and modernization with automation to unlock the 
creative capabilities of the workforce and enhance productivity.  
 
Access for skills development or training opportunities is limited for individuals from 
lower-income households, rural and less well-educated workers, and women. The just 
transition program will target those people for the labor markets of the future in the 
following sectors -  banking, finance, urban transport, ICT, health care, education, 
tourism, agriculture, shrimp cultivation, forest a nd biodiversity conservation, water 
management, waste management, carbon trading, electric transport, materials 
management, green construction, tanning, telecommunications, manufacturing such 
as the clothing industry, and renewable energy (e.g., solar, wind, biogas) and storage. 
Equally important, as highlighted in 8FYP, is the quality of educators whose expertise 
will be a key factor in the success of the just transition and modernization of the 
workforce.            
    
We aim to foster women’s qualitative participation in all areas of the economic sphere 
relating to green transition and low -carbon development. To enhance women’s 
economic empowerment, targeted skills development training will be provided, based 
on women’s needs. Gender -responsive training covering relevant skills coupled with 
fiscal stimulus packages and social protection programs will be a key priority. We will 
also focus on increasing the individual and institutional capacity of the labor force. 
While higher rates of investment from both domestic and foreign sources are needed, 
addressing technical and allocative efficiency barriers that prevent efficient use of 
capital will be vital. 
 
Accelerated climate action through the installation and management of energy 
efficiency and ren ewable energy provides more jobs and higher skills than 
technologies of the past such as oil, coal, and gas. Power sector modernization 
through energy efficiency and renewable energy consistent with the 1.5°C limit of the 
Paris Agreement could create twice  the number of jobs by 2050, which is equivalent 
to a 68% net increase in jobs globally. 18 For Bangladesh, a recent study showed that 
modernization through renewable energy and energy efficiency could lead to 6 times 
more jobs than fossil fuel generation, that is up to 55,000 new jobs between 2016 and 
2030.19 
 
18 Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF)VF (2016). Low Carbon Monitor 2016: Pursuing the 1.5°C Limit Benefits and 
Opportunities. Climate Vulnerable Forum.. Retrieved February 17, 2021, from 
https://thecvf.org/resources/publications/low-carbon-monitor/ 
19 Saha, B., Kindle, A., Cookson, P. , & Vaidya, R. (2017, May). Benefits of low emission development strategies: The 
case of clean energy policies in Bangladesh. LEDS Global Partnership and USAID. ClimateLinks: A Global Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 33  
 
 
Figure 4: Job Intensity Across Technologies 
 
Just Transition and Modernization through Training and Skills Development for Labor 
Markets of the Future can...  
Avoid GDP losses of up to 
2.45% in 2025 and up to 
4.9% in 2030.  
Train and reskill at least 
3.83 million people by 2030  
Generate 6 times more job 
opportunities under the 
Mujib vision 
 
 
 
Knowledge Portal for Climate and Development Practitioners. Retrieved February 17, 2021, from 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_LEDS_RALI_Benefits%20of%20low%20e
mission%20development%20strategies_Bangladesh_Case_Study.pdf 34 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022      We will join the Climate Action for Jobs Initiative. MoEFCC 
2022 We will conduct a labor market assessment and stress test the 
labor force and quality of educators to achieve a just transition 
and modernization. 
MoI and 
MoLE 
2023 We will create a plan to transform low-productivity and low-wage 
development to high -productivity and high -growth including 
reskilling and special gender -transformative labor market 
programs, coordinated with National Skills Development 
Authority (NSDA) and the National Human Resource 
Development Fund (NHRDF.) 
MoI 
2023 We will improve the quality of educators through enhanced 
support, training, and partnerships with regional and international 
collaborators. 
MoEFCC 
2023 The Bangladesh National Skills Development Authority  (NSDA) 
will coordinate with workers’ associations on the implementation 
of the transformational plan.  
MoI 
2024 We will finalize a combination of investment options including 
supply chain coordination, industry coordination to lower costs, 
national government, and donor support to boost workers 
productivity and efficiency. 
MoI 
2025 Retrofitting 50% of the commercial built environment to adjust to 
the hotter climate. 
MoI 
2030 Retrofitting 100% of the commercial built environment to adjust 
to the hotter climate. 
MoI 
 
 
Just Transition and modernization of the labor force is a direct investment that 
supports Covid-19 Recovery Interventions 20 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Short implementation timeline 
Support for long-term transformation 
 
20 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low-Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 35  
 
Targets disadvantaged groups (e.g., women, 
rural, etc.) 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks 
High employment intensity 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDG 1: No Poverty SDG 4: Quality Education SDG 5: Gender Equality 
SDG 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
And Infrastructure 
SDG 10: Reduced Inequality 
SDG 13: Climate Action SDG 17: Partnerships  
 
 
Key Measures 
Built-environment adaptation, through insulation, other energy efficiency measures, and 
low-cost renewable energy powered heating, ventilation, and air -conditioning (HVAC) 
for buildings 
3.83 million people trained and reskilled through Just Transition programs 
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
International resources for 
training modules and 
technology transfer 
opportunities 
 
National budget support via 
Skills Employment 
Investment Program (SEIP) 
Public–private partnership 
and investment for better 
education, skills, 
entrepreneurship, and 
employment 
 
2B. Future-Proof Bangladesh’s Position in the Global Supply Chain  
 
We will future -proof Bangladesh’s role in global supply chains by positioning the 
country through export diversification as a viable modernized platform. This may 
counteract the loss of duty -free quota-free (DFQF) market access for Bangladesh’s 
exports as a result of the country’s LDC graduation by 2026.  Export diversification will 
be supported by capitalizing on green opportunities including green logistics (e.g., 36 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
ports, rail, inland waterway), green power including hydrogen, ammonia, batteries, 
other gre en technology, productivity, and energy efficiency gains, as well as 
preparedness for extreme weather events.  
 
Moreover, modernization will include a reduction in environmental risks through 
improved supply chain engagement such as environmental data disc losure. Future-
proofing the country’s supply chain will reduce spillover risks that can undermine 
competitive global positioning.  
 
The future -proofing is built on the foundation of 8FYP, which articulates that the 
government will implement policies to support improved infrastructure, strengthen 
human capital (through education and training) and incentivize research and 
development. Knowledge and technol ogy transfer can enhance the resilient growth 
benefits of trade, and so ensure the country’s participation in global supply chains and 
improved value engineering in supply chain management. 
 
We will hasten export-led growth underpinned by green supply chain opportunities and 
diversification into sectors that can create jobs for many of the 2 million people 
entering the labor force each year. 21 This can build on Bangladesh Bank Refinance 
Scheme for Environment Friendly Products which aims to promote the envi ronment-
friendly financial products/initiatives in Bangladesh such as biogas, energy efficiency, 
green industry, and safe work environment. 
 
As solar photovoltaic and wind power proves to be technically and economically 
viable, future -proofing the global s upply chain includes accelerated support for 
modern technologies. For example, the deflationary cost trajectory of concentrating 
solar power (CSP) technologies increases the certainty of CSPs future in the energy 
mix, especially for industries that require thermal power or high energy intensity such 
as cement and steel production. Hydrogen has the additional advantage of being able 
to replace coking coal for zero-carbon emissions steel production.  
 
Currently, there are 150 factories with the Leadership in Energy and Environmental 
Design (LEED) certification and 500 factories undergoing such certification. Meeting 
the standard for LEED certification realizes benefits such as cost savings from 
reduced energy and water consumption, lower operating costs, durab ility, and 
improved indoor air quality and employee productivity - which in turn contribute to 
global competitiveness of the factories. LEED certification will be completed for 
strategic export industries by 2030 including jute, leather, textiles, informat ion 
technology (IT) services or components, high -value agriculture, and green hydrogen. 
It is important to note that commercial rooftop solar technology can also contribute 
to LEED certification.  
 
 
21 Sumi, H.F., & Reaz M.M. (2020, Jan uary). Building Competitive Sectors for Export Diversification: Opportunities 
and Policy Priorities for Bangladesh. International Finance Corporation (IFC). World Bank. Retrieved April 5, 2021, 
from http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/982561587362264731/pdf/Building-Competitive-Sectors-
for-Export-Diversification-Opportunities-and-Policy-Priorities-for-Bangladesh.pdf Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 37  
 
As a part of the Bangladesh government’s own vision and ac tion, a National Green 
Building Certification Scheme is in progress. The proposed scheme is designed to 
speed up the adoption of green building principles and enhance the design and 
construction of buildings. The goal is to support the environment by encou raging 
sustainable construction practices, conserving energy, water and building materials, 
and promoting resource efficiency. 
 
According to the World Bank, the social cost of annual carbon dioxide emission from 
road freight transport in Bangladesh is equi valent to 1.2% of GDP with 60% of 
emissions caused by road congestion. Enhancing domestic logistics, for example, 
could save costs amounting up to 50% of sales for horticulture products. 22 Driving 
cost and energy usage efficiencies in transportation, stora ge and handling of freight 
will be a key objective to strengthen Bangladesh’s position in global supply chains. 
 
We will encourage the use of electric and hydrogen -powered vehicles and 
synchromodal transportation to transport goods, development of energy e fficient 
warehouses through the use of sustainable building materials, and large -scale 
electrification of cargo -handling equipment in logistics facilities such as ports and 
inland terminals including cold chains. Incentive schemes will be deployed to lower  
the direct and indirect costs of logistics while also reducing both dependence on fossil 
fuels and their harmful environmental effects. 
 
Improving the logistics network to ensure imports and exports are transported in the 
most cost -effective and efficient  manner is in line with commitments from major 
companies already operating in Bangladesh.23 Future-proofing Bangladesh’s position 
in the global supply chain through measures such end -to-end digital integration,  
sustainable supplier relationships, optimize d and automated supply chain 
management and responsible practices can crowd -in more than 280 members of 
RE100 with 100% renewable energy commitments 24 and over 1000 businesses with 
net-zero commitments by 2050.25 
 
Green Exports Program 
The Green Exports Pr ogram will support export -led growth in the various industries 
mentioned earlier by including a certification of exports that utilize LEED certified 
factories, voluntary sustainability standards, green transportation, and clean energy 
 
22 Staff Correspondent. (2019, November 14). High Transport Cost Hurting Economy The Daily Star. Retrieved 
February 17, 2021, from https://www.thedailystar.net`/backpage/news/high-transportation-cost-hurts-economy-
1826758  
23 Including those with RE100 commitments such as Ajinomoto, Citi, Commerzbank, Dell Technologies, FUJIFILM 
Holdings, HSBC, Kingspan, Konica Minolta, Mastercard, Nestle, Phillips -Van Heusen (PVH), Sanofi, Schneider 
Electric, SGS, Steelcase, Target Corp, Tata Motors, Unilever, and Visa, as well as companies with ne t zero 
commitments by 2050 such as LafargeHolcim, Charoen Pokphand (CP) Group, Nestle, H&M, Siemens, Unilever, 
Reckitt Benckiser Group, GlaxoSmithKline, Ericsson, Artistic Milliners, Arauco, Biogen, etc. 
24  RE100 (2022). RE100 Members. RE100. Retrieved Mar ch 21, 2022, from https://www.there100.org/re100-
members?page=1  
25 UNFCCC (2022). Race to Zero Campaign. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
Retrieved March 21, 2022, from https://unfccc.int/climate-action/race-to-zero-campaign 38 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
utilization by energy  efficiency measures in high -value agriculture, manufacturing, 
industrial and other built environments, renewable energy installations for high -value 
agriculture, manufacturing and industrial areas, including through the use of carbon 
credits, environmental data disclosure, measures taken to improve preparedness for 
extreme weather events.   
 
The Green Exports Program aims at global recognition of Bangladesh’s ability to 
respond to current and future requirements of major companies and global policy 
shifts including renewable energy commitments, net zero carbon commitments, and 
pending carbon border adjustment taxes in the EU and other major economies.   
 
The Green Exports Program will also include special support to micro -, small - and 
medium-sized enterprises and high-value agriculture products for manufacturing and 
will thus support the future -proofing of Bangladesh’s role in the global supply chain. 
This can be supported by Bangladesh Bank’s Green Transformation Fund which 
intends to facilitate access to financing in foreign exchange to export oriented textile 
and textile products, and leather goods manufacturing industries to import capital 
machinery and other necessities relevant to following environment -friendly/green 
attributes.26  
 
To increase the global competitiveness and appeal of exports from Bangladesh, it is 
imperative to bring down the associated logistics costs. This reduction could be 
achieved by using digital technology to improve the way that transport vehicles and 
facilities are used. Gr een transportation and warehousing practices are particularly 
effective. In addition, using sustainable materials to package goods would increase 
the attractiveness of Bangladesh’s exports.   
 
The localization of global supply chains is an opportunity for the South Asia region to 
become better integrated economically. Regional partnerships including connectivity 
with neighboring countries in terms of better value-chain/supply-chain integration can 
also be strengthened. Bangladesh’s location means it can bec ome a key production 
center as it modernizes facilities, trains up labor, and improves transportation time 
and costs.  
 
Future-Proofing Bangladesh’s Global Supply Chain can . . .  
Enable a 30% increase 
in energy savings per 
annum for industry27 
Increase capture of 
global market share 
by at least 1% per year 
Establish a green supply chain and 
logistics network to attract ESG 
(Environmental, social, and 
governance) investors among others 
 
26 Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework 2020 
27 Tetra Tech ES, Inc. (2014, May). Bangladesh: Industrial Energy Effici ency Finance Program (Project Number: 
45916). Asian Development Bank (ADB) Technical Consultant’s Report. Retrieved June 7, 2021, from 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/80742/45916-014-tacr-01.pdf Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 39  
 
Target Milestones  
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 We will appraise green opportunities including green logistics 
(e.g., ports and rail), green power including hydrogen, green 
technology, productivity and energy efficiency gains, as well as 
preparedness for extreme weather events. 
MPEMR 
2023 We will establish a Green Exports Program. MoCom 
2023 We will coordinate with major companies on improving logistics 
and sustainability to expand market opportunities in Bangladesh. 
MoCom 
2023 We will ensure LEED Certification of 500 additional factories.  MoI 
2023 Structure investments to lower the cost of trading across 
borders, financial access, and the allocation of credit across 
sectors, and improved human capital allocation to enable greater 
export diversification28 
MoF 
2024 Make environm ental and climate data disclosure mandatory 
throughout the supply chain in line with international standards.29 
MoEFCC 
2025 Reduce logistics cost by 25%. MoI 
2025 Extend LEED Certification to 1000 additional factories. MoI 
2025 50% LEED Certification for strategic export industries.  MoI 
2030 LEED Certification of 2000 additional factories. MoI 
2030 100% LEED Certification for strategic export industries. MoI 
2030 Reduce logistics cost by 50%. MoI 
 
 
Future-proofing Bangladesh’s Positioning in the Global Economy is a Direct 
Investment Measure that Supports COVID-19 Recovery Interventions 30 such as . . .  
 
28 Giri, R., Quayyum, S.N., & Yin, R. (2019, May 10). Understanding Export Diversification: Key Drivers and Policy 
Implications (Working Paper No. 19/105). IMF Working Papers. International Monetary Fund (IMF). Retrieved May 
10, 2021, from  https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/05/14/Understanding-Export-
Diversification-Key-Drivers-and-Policy-Implications-46851  
29  https://6fefcbb86e61af1b2fc4-c70d8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcdd1d.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/ 
documents/000/005/554/original/CDP_SC_Report_2020.pdf?1613048129 
30 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 40 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Climate and Resilience Results 
and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high-
level technology 
Targets sectors or populations 
affected by non -financial 
shocks 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Support for long-term transformation 
High employment intensity 
Skills development 
Contribution to the productive asset base 
High economic multiplier 
Strong supply chain 
 
 
SDGs 
SDG 6: Clean Water and 
Sanitation 
SDG 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDG 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
and Infrastructure 
SDG 12: Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production 
SDG 13: Climate Action 
SDGs      17: Partnerships   
 
 
Key Measures 
Establish Green Exports Program. 
Energy efficiency measures installed in manufacturing, industrial and other built 
environments. 
Renewable energy installations available to manufacturing and industrial areas to 
improve resilience. 
LEED certification of 3,500 factories including 100% of strategic export industries.  
50%–100% greening and electrification of the transport/logistics s ector and strategic 
export industries. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 41  
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
International supply chain 
investment support from 
import and export partners 
Fiscal incentives including 
tax holidays and 
commercial subsidies 
compatible with WTO 
provisions 
Industry capital 
investment and industry 
utilization 
 
Public Private Partnership 
on green logistics 42 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Key Priority Area  3. Increasing public revenue to spend on the most 
vulnerable 
3A. Investment in the Realization of Locally Led Adaptation and Reduced 
Climate-induced Migration Outcomes 
 
We will invest in the realization of locally led adaptation including long -term funding 
and decision-making support at the most appropriate level for communities, as well 
as enabling preferential access for women, next generation youth, PWDs and climate 
displaced people. Mainstreaming climate change in various programmatic actions is 
key. We will provide a co -supported funding window through the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and cooperatives for locally led adaptation in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Planning and Ministry of Finance. The framing of 
locally led adaptation and the processes of a co -supported funding window will be 
detailed as needed, including the necessary institutional arrangements. 
 
In line with the 8FYP  and the Natio nal Adaptation Plan (NAP) of Bangladesh , the 
delivery of locally led adaptation aims to address poverty, inequality and vulnerability 
in all its dimensions, beyond income or consumption, through the inclusion of hazards 
compounded by climate change such as  vulnerability to shocks and risks to health, 
education, empowerment. Moreover, locally led adaptation outcomes enable the 
acceleration of “My Village -My Town” to extend modernized facilities such as 
infrastructure, utilities, healthcare, digital solutions , and mobile financial services to 
every village. It also adds a climate resilient dimension which will enable acceleration 
of “My House -My Farm” 31 projects’ goals of organizing poor households under the 
village society, motivating them to save, providing skill development training, providing 
low-cost as well as seasonal credit, entrepreneurship development, marketing 
promotion, ecosystems conservation and digital financial service.  30 million people 
are at risk to be displaced from the coastal areas in Ba ngladesh with severe 
implications on livelihood, habitat, drinking water, and rural economy. Protecting 
internal displacement by more decentralized and resilient ‘My Village – My Town’ so 
that people have better life in their own settlement and the benefit  of growth reaches 
to the bottom with less absorption of benefit in different ladders.    
 
There is an opportunity for a systemic approach in mainstreaming climate change into 
local level planning and financing process in Bangladesh and not enough practica l 
means to bring the climate science on the ground with people’s perception to the 
 
31 Government of People’s Republic of Bangladesh Ministry of LGRD & Cooperatives Rural Development and 
Cooperative Division (2018, July 3). Project Overview:  Ektee Bari Ektee Khamar (EBEK) Project (Third Revision). 
Retrieved February 17, 2021, from http://www.ebek-rdcd.gov.bd/site/page/da340399-e912-46a4-a262-
e01c4917cd28/- Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 43  
 
scientific knowledge with local knowledge to address climate risk and support 
adaptation planning. Presently, the Government of Bangladesh spends approximately 
7%-8% of its annual budget for adaptation and enhancing climate resilience (MoF, 
2021). 
 
To ensure climate finance investments are made within the right locations of the local 
level, on right risks, right communities, and on right adaptation means, we will continue 
to promote scalable LLA solutions offered by GoB’s Local Government Division 
(LGD)’s project on Local Government Initiative on Climate Change (LoGIC). Whereby, 
a proven local climate financing mechanism has been established through evidence -
based advocacy and two dedicated financing to support local adaptation plans. First, 
by provid ing grants to local governments as additional resources to climate -proof 
their investment on community -based adaptation schemes. Thereby, contributing to 
make local infrastructures including drinking water, livelihoods, irrigation, evacuation, 
early warnin g, water management systems, watersheds, roads, culverts etc. more 
resilient, gender responsive and best suited to incorporate nature-based solutions for 
adaptation. The LLA can benefit from incorporation of ccGAP by increasing women’s 
role as first respon der’s and for monitoring and maintenance of local infrastructure 
(e.g., early warning, embankment breach, river erosion and infrastructure breakage). 
Secondly, by providing conditional grants directly to the vulnerable households, it is 
enhancing people’s adaptive capacity by sharpening skills in pursuing individual and 
group enterprise on resilient livelihoods means, both on farm and off farm. It also 
includes incorporating innovative technology for climate change adaptation solutions 
at local level with s mall initiatives. The project is identifying 225 most climate 
vulnerable wards through census and risk atlas, and developed the vulnerability index 
of each household. The most vulnerable 35,000 households and moderate vulnerable 
10,000 households are selected (in progress) for skill development on climate resilient 
livelihoods.  
 
A scalable model as this exemplifies how structural barriers can be removed through 
policy advocacy, innovative financing mechanism, and public-private partnership, with 
government entities like LGD on the lead of locally led adaptation. By investing in 
climate resilient livelihoods like crab hatchery, sheep breeding, and sunflower oil 
processing, the model helps to scale-up nature-based solutions supporting locally led 
adaptation. It therefore encompasses ideas based on creating livelihood 
opportunities or jobs that are resilient and green as a sustainable pathway for 
employment and therefore contributing to the larger human development spectrum. 
Its unique contribution for measurin g adaptation progress and outcome through 
effective tracking and monitoring make it distinctive in terms of its larger contribution 
to the global adaptation goal. It has also developed the social audit protocol and 
Adaptation Tracking Mechanism to assess b oth bottom up and top -down 
performance assessment of the adaptation benefits of the grants and training. Hence, 
the model provides evidence of enhanced resilience of vulnerable people, making its 
upcoming phases highly scalable through the GCF or other int ernational climate 
finance mechanisms. 44 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Among others, we will also continue to support housing initiatives like “Ashrayan”, to 
settle displaced and landless people through the extension of land ownership, 
ensuring visibility of the vulnerable and enabling their access to services. Under the 
Mujib Year Celebration, 100,000 more homeless families had already been given 
houses in December 2020. We also continue to strengthen country -wide national 
initiatives for rehabilitation of beggars who are often migrants  as victims of climate-
induced disasters like river erosion, floods and droughts, through rehabilitation 
centers with training and healthcare facilities and alternative employment.  We also 
continue the implementation of the “Palli Janapad'' project by the  Ministry of LGRD & 
Cooperatives. The main aim of the project is restoration of agricultural land for food 
security and livelihood improvement of the rural community with modern facilities 
including community -based bio -gas plant as a source of renewable en ergy, solar 
power system as alternate source of electricity, rainwater harvesting and waste 
management facilities, and employment and entrepreneurship opportunities through 
various capacity building activities. These will contribute to zero migration by 
protecting or transforming the livelihoods of at -risk areas and people. It also 
safeguards the zero-poverty by 2030 target.  
 
This measure will be complemented by ensuring that the coastal belt is made 100% 
climate resilient. Climate resilience means the capacity of a system, structure or entity 
potentially exposed to climate hazards to adapt, by resisting or changing to reach and 
maintain an acceptable level of functioning and structure. To ensure a climate -
resilient coastal belt, appropriate processes are n eeded to adapt policy, governance 
arrangements, and co -management practices for resource development along the 
coastline in response to climate change. 
 
We recognize the best way to implement locally led adaptation is to engage 
communities at the design ph ase, and also to support community -based monitoring 
and evaluation. Early engagement will allow the evaluation of community benefits 
while building adaptive capacities. Equally important is the engagement of local 
authorities to build confidence within the ir communities by making them part of the 
decision-making process. Locally led adaptation programs can leverage value across 
communities through collaborative ventures. Moreover, as locally led adaptation 
programs are integrated into broader value chain development, they can be supported 
with international and regional funding. To achieve these goals, a capacity -building 
program led by universities will be undertaken in tandem with the project design and 
implementation. 
 
In addition, there is a need for ble nded and participatory risk mapping for the 
vulnerable unions of Bangladesh with top -down risk mapping . As a long-term      
journey, spatial and temporal factors will play critical roles to design context -specific 
and geographically-specific locally led adaptation solutions.  In addition, using socio -
economic indicators and exposure information, vulnerability should be quantified 
through ‘scoring’ across all unions in Bangladesh, segregated by wards and be 
available via open access dashboards. Based on this, we will support micro-modeling 
and downscaling methods towards inundation and risk mapping in line with 1.5 to 2.0 
degree scenario-based projections Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 45  
 
Climate change and its widespread effects threaten lives and livelihoods, impeding 
global efforts to reduce poverty and promote shared prosperity. Climate services use 
environmental knowledge and information that plays a vital role in climate -resilient 
development at the household level by increasing women’s participation. Vulnerability 
mapping and  analysis for women, especially when combined with different age 
groups, and indigenous women’s knowledge and practices, will increase climate 
resilience and improve climate and environmental outcomes.  
 
We will ensure women’s representation and participat ion in capacity -building 
programs and enable policies and financing processes that address their needs. We 
will engage with women’s organizations, networks, and unions to improve women’s 
economic empowerment, self -entrepreneurship and climate, and environm ental 
outcomes. In line with the ccGAP, we will continue to allocate financial resources to 
address gender and Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) issues and ensure participation of 
women in community level assessments and mapping engagements. Access to 
modern technology will also enable women to manage climate risk, respond to climate 
variability, and access support and information relevant to their livelihoods during 
climate shocks. Targeted social protection measures linked to the resilience of social 
and ecological systems will contribute to women’s adaptive capacity and provide a 
stepping-stone to other economic opportunities. 
 
To ensure locally led adaptation is effective, the MCPP will create Locally Led 
Adaptation Hubs (LLA Hubs) that will act as focal poi nts for locally led projects. LLA 
Hubs will prioritize 1) gender equality through a transformative approach to benefit 
women from climate actions, including through gender-focused and targeted training, 
special financing, and program opportunities, and 2) financial inclusion through 
targeted interventions to bring vulnerable communities under the umbrella of mobile 
financial services. More importantly, as a result of economic and non -economic loss 
and damage due to inadequate emission reduction measures globally, LLA Hubs must 
act to avert, minimize, and address impacts and loss and damage which will require 
finance and dedicated financing mechanisms.  
 
The LLA Hubs will house information on communities, provide a forum for discussion 
and consultation on projects, enhance community participation and success tracking 
with specialized incentives for communities. As a Hub, or learning platform, an 
Adaptation Learning Center for women, similar to that established in Deluti Union of 
Bangladesh, by the Inclusive Bu dgeting and Financing for Climate Resilience project, 
can provide space for women to learn about climate adaptive livelihoods, share 
experiences and build their capacities, both individually and collectively.   
 
The LLA Hubs will prioritize the most vulnerable regions taking into consideration the 
correlation between poverty and disaster, establishing hubs in 20% to 30% of areas by 
2025 and 100% by 2030.  
 
The development of equitable and sustainable business models is key to achieving 
prosperity outcomes through locally led adaptation. Such a business model may look 
like this: 46 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
 
Figure 5: Business model -prosperity outcomes through locally led adaptation 
 
The Private Sector Facility (PSF) of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) can be explored to 
fund and mobilize private sector actors and stakeholders, including institutional 
investors, and capitalize on existing funds to attract private corporations in climate 
interventions. This can engage both the local and global private sector in supporting 
climate change mitigation and adaptation projects, therefore catalyzing for funding 
high impact, transformative climate projects and activities in developing countries. 
We will support in exploring PSF’s pivotal role in supporting strategic private sector 
inclusion and engagement to upscale private -sector driven investments necessary. 
Also, the Kampala Principles on Effective Private Sector Engagement in Development 
Co-operation may guide private sector partnerships for development to be more 
effective while ensuring inclusivity at country level to provide sustainable value chains 
and responsible business models.   
 
Locally led nature-based solutions can protect natural resources in communities while 
enhancing and protecting plant and animal biodiversity, conserving genetic resources, 
protecting wildlife habitats, and improving the condition and quality of ecosystems for 
multiple dimensions of resilience. In line with the ccGA P, we will document, 
disseminate and promote indigenous knowledge and products on agriculture with 
special focus to indigenous and traditional practices by women. Additionally, we could 
promote technologies and tools that help smallholder farmers and produ cers to 
increase their incomes by reducing input costs. Moreover, premium prices could be 
sought for sustainably produced products. 
   
Consideration of these above factors will remain imperative for sustainable locally led 
adaptation interventions in Bangl adesh. As such the transition from vulnerability to 
building resilience (economy and people) and then prosperity (focusing on Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 47  
 
transformation of the economy and society towards environmental globalization) will 
contribute towards economic transformation in the long run. 
 
 
Locally led adaptation aims. . .  
To mobilize USD 1 billion per year by 2030 from 
international and national resources in locally-led 
adaptation via the Ministry of Local Government 
and Rural Development in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Planning and Ministry of Finance by 
2030, including through international channels 
such as the Green Climate Fund 32 , Global 
Environment Facility, and Adaptation Fund. 
Ministry of Agriculture and other relevant agencies 
can propose and submit proposals f or 
consideration in the implementation of LLA Hubs 
To generate USD 
300 million in 
costs avoided per 
year.33 
To eradicate 
extreme 
poverty by 
2030. 
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 We will adopt the locally -led adaptation principles launched in 
the 2021 Climate Adaptation Summit.34 
MoEFCC 
2022      We will conduct vulnerability mapping and analysis in terms of 
geography, sex, age, disability, especially in rural communities 
and indigenous areas to better understand regional variations 
in composite vulnerability. 
MoEFCC 
2022      We will create a locally led adaptation window in the Ministry of 
Local Government and Rural Development in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Planning and Ministry of Finance. Ministry of 
Agriculture and other relevant agencies can propose and 
submit proposals for consideration in the implementation of 
LLA Hubs 
MoLGRDC 
 
32 Engagement with the GCF is based on the current country programme of Bangladesh. 
33  Hallegatte, Stephane; Rentschler, Jun; Rozenberg, Julie. (2019). Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure 
Opportunity. Sustainable Infrastructure. Washington, DC: World Bank. © World Bank. Retrieved February 17, 2021, 
from https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/31805 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. (For every $1 invested, 
at least $4 in benefit). 
34 Global Commission on Adaptation. (2021, July). Principles for Locally Led Adaptation Action: Statement for 
Endorsement. World Resources Institute (WRI). Retrieved M arch 21, 2022, from      https://files.wri.org/s3fs-
public/uploads/Locally_Led_Adaptation_Principles_-_Endorsement_Version.pdf 48 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
2023      We will consult vulnerable communities to ascertain capacities 
and build capabilities to drive locally led actions including 
leading projects, delivery of projects, and greater access to 
finance. 
MoLGRDC 
2023      We will begin effective private sector engagement in climate 
change adaptation in promoting locally led adapta tion in 
collaboration with PPPA, BIDA and other established 
mechanisms. 
MoLGRDC 
2023      We will develop an adaptation-tracking mechanism to quantify 
adaptation efforts and assess vulnerability reduction through 
adaptation interventions by exploring various indicators of 
vulnerability (social, physical, cultural etc.).  
MoEFCC 
2023      We will develop a mechanism for success tracking and 
incentivizing so that successful projects get more support, and 
the most vulnerable communities receive special support to get 
them on track. 
MoLGRDC 
2023      We will develop a national green growth strategy to guide the 
fund-allocation strategy, themes, delivery mechanisms, and 
capacity-building needs as well as financing approaches  
MoEFCC 
2024      We will form a consortium of national, regional, and 
international technical partners to build analytical skills, 
knowledge, and resources for delivering the plan. 
MoEFCC 
2024      We will mobilize an additional USD 100 million per year for 
locally led adaptation.  
MoF 
2025      We will mobilize an additional USD 150 million per year for 
locally led adaptation. 
MoF 
2026      We will establish LLA Hubs in 20% to 30% of the most 
vulnerable areas. 
MoLGRDC 
2026 We will mobilize an additional USD 250 million per year for 
locally led adaptation. 
MoF 
2027 We will mobilize an additional USD 350 million per year for 
locally led adaptation. 
MoF 
2028      We will mobilize an additional USD 500 million per year for 
locally led adaptation. 
MoF 
2029      We will mobilize an additional USD 650 million per year for 
locally led adaptation. 
MoF Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 49  
 
2030 We will e nsure 100% of the coastal belt is made climate -
resilient 
MoLGRDC 
2030 We will establish LLA hubs in 100% of the most vulnerable 
areas. 
MoLGRDC 
2030 We will mobilize an additional USD 1 billion per year for locally 
led adaptation. 
MoF 
2041 We will ensure zero climate-induced migration by 2041. MoLGRDC 
 
 
Locally led adaptation is a direct investment measure that supports Covid-19 recovery 
interventions 35 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks 
Covid-19 Recovery Dividend:  
Support for long-term transformation 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
SDGs 
SDG 1: No Poverty SDG 2: Zero Hunger SDG 5: Gender Equality 
SDG 6: Clean Water and 
Sanitation 
SDG 7: Clean and 
Affordable Energy 
SDG 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
and Infrastructure 
SDG 10: Reduced Inequality SDG 12: Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production 
SDG 13: Climate Action SDG 14: Life Below Water SDG 15: Life on Land 
SDG 16: Peace and Justice, 
Strong Institutions 
SDGs      17: Partnerships  
 
 
 
Key Measures 
 
35 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 50 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Create LLA hubs that will act as a focal point for locally led projects and a repository of 
information on communities, provide a forum for discussion and consultation on 
projects to be developed, and enhance wider community engagement for LLA focusing 
mostly on vulnerable regions (20% –30% progressing towards 100% by 2030). The 
structure of LLA hubs will be decided and adopted through national consultations with 
all relevant stakeholders. 
Mobilize USD 1 billion per annum in locally led adaptation by 2030. 
Deploy a tracking mechanism to quantify adaptation efforts and assess vulnerability 
reduction through adap tation interventions through exploring various indicators of 
vulnerability (social, physical, cultural etc.) Universities can generate the relevant 
approaches, methods, and tools for such quantification of adaptation outcomes.    
Deploy a tracking mechanism for success tracking and incentivizing so that successful 
projects get more support while the most vulnerable communities receive special 
support, including incentives. 
Develop a blueprint to guide the national fund -allocation strategy, themes, deliver y 
mechanisms, capacity-building needs and financing approaches such as guarantees, 
concessional loans, convertible debt, and equity. 
Form a consortium of national, regional, and international technical partners to 
contribute to the development of analytic al insights, knowledge and resources for 
delivering the plan. 
Developing a multi-stakeholder platform for the demand and supply side actors in LLA 
to interact with the market as the key driver to achieve resilience and foster public-
private interaction and enhanced private sector engagement.  
   
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
Enhanced access to global 
funding windows such as 
the Green Climate Fund and 
exploring opportunities for 
regional and international 
partnership.  
National budget support via 
8FYP and allocation from 
Bangladesh Climate 
Change Trust Fund. 
Industry – capital 
investment and industry 
consumers as users of 
ecosystem services. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 51  
 
3B. An Established Carbon Financing Regime for Revenue Generation 
 
Bangladesh, like many developing countries, has large carbon sinks. The world needs 
the certainty of a carbon financing regime that keeps our economies safe (1.5° C      
compliant). Equally important and based on analysis of the short age of adaptation 
finance, a global carbon financing regime should bring substantial new financial 
support for adaptation.  
 
The Bangladesh NDC targets major black carbon sources and major methane sources 
through the  Bangladesh National Action Plan for Reducing Short -Lived Climate 
Pollutants (SLCPs). Full implementation of the National SLCP Plan is expected to 
reduce black carbon emissions by 40% and methane emissions by 17% by 2030. 
 
In line with such targets, we will consider 1) enabling a carbon market or carbon 
financing mechanism with other V20 mechanisms; 2) harnessing the potential of 
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and voluntary carbon markets to bring in additional 
financing; and 3) encouraging bilateral joint crediting mechanisms. 
 
Strategies can include, but are not limited to, objectives such as revenue -raising 
(carbon tax), behavior shifts (carbon tax and carbon pricing), and new sources of 
investment finance (international carbon markets). As it is essential to prioritize the 
objective for each instrument put in place, a strategy for and the auditing of carbon in 
this regard is imperative.  
 
As a starting point, a National Carbon Finance Coordination Hub will be set up to 
attract investment from the voluntary carbon market for a) specific standalone 
projects and b) sectoral jurisdictional programs, where funds from voluntary carbon 
markets (VCM) can be channeled through a fund and/or matched with other sources 
of funding. VCM demand is growing fast and will likely accelerate after the publication 
of the Taskforce on Scaling Voluntary Carbon Markets outputs. In addition, a 
monitoring and evaluation system for carbon pricing will also be under development. 
Agencies that may be considered for participation in the National Carbon Finance 
Coordination Hub include Bangladesh Forest Department, National Board of Revenue, 
Economic Relations Division, and Power Division.  
 
The National Carbon Finance Coordination Hub will strategically  look to donor 
partners early to fund or underwrite payments by results programs for a) forest/tree 
conservation, including sustainable management of non -timber forest products 
(NTFPs) b) afforestation and reforestation c) (natural) revegetation e.g., mang roves, 
d) coastal ecosystem conservation, protection and rehabilitation e.g., mangroves, tidal 
marshes, and seagrass meadows e) decarbonization of mass transit systems (e.g., 
Dhaka bus fleet) and/or f) a scrappage payment for early retirement of uneconomic  
coal-fired power stations in addition to being linked to loss and damage financing, 
adaptation, and renewable energy funding. These could either be done through the 
voluntary market or eventually under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement (subject to 
corresponding adjustments). Off-grid, rural micro and mini grids with storage may also 
apply for programs of support through carbon financing. 52 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
As Bangladesh is part of the V20, a joint carbon fund may be under consideration 
where projects, including from Banglade sh, can bid for carbon finance and the fund 
can be tasked with pooling revenue and marketing the credits. Moreover, Bangladesh, 
with a few similar -sized countries, may consider designing an emissions trading 
scheme (aimed at power stations, cement plants, and steel mills, for example). These 
may ultimately consider a bilateral or trilateral arrangement with a given sector, for 
example the power to set a target and allow installations relating to the target to trade 
and achieve goals collectively.  The participating entities will require early feasibility 
studies and plans that include the institutional requirement for emissions trading, 
carbon markets, and carbon pricing. Bringing about such markets will be contingent 
on securing financing, including through international carbon markets.  
 
Carbon tax implementation would require a dividend to transfer revenue to low -
income households through rebates, and in order to raise additional revenue of up to 
0.15% of GDP by 2025 and 1% of GDP by 2030. 36 The carbon tax would also include 
“industrial allocations” whereby groups such as MSMEs and low -income earners will 
be exempted from the tax. For other sectors and high-income groups, exemptions may 
range from 80% at the start of the program with a tempered reduction until 2030 to 
reach full compliance.  
       
The carbon tax could be an additional revenue source alongside the tax reforms and 
income tax system modernization efforts highlighted in the 8FYP. An administratively 
practical option is to levy a carbon tax on fossil fuels and use the proceeds to bolster 
government revenue. That would enable other taxes to be reduced or earmarked for a 
combination of market readiness and adaptation/resilience projects. 
 
We will also encourage carbon credits from fores t carbon, soil carbon, renewable 
energy, and blue carbon to be made tradable through carbon financing platforms and 
joint credit mechanisms via bilateral arrangements with support from, for example, 
the Asian Development Bank and the private sector.  
 
Bangladesh’s wood-burning cooking stoves could be modernized by better design and 
biogas. They could also benefit from an established market regime. Moreover, current 
commitments of total tree coverage to increase to 25% by 2030 from the existing 22% 
could als o benefit from a carbon financing regime. There are also co -benefits 
stemming from reduced loss of life due to increasing lightning strikes. 
 
 
 
An established carbon financing regime can deliver. . .  
 
36International Monetary Fund (IMF)  Fiscal Affairs Department (2019, May 1). Fiscal Policies for Paris Climate 
Strategies—from Principle to Practice (Policy Paper No. 19/010). Policy Papers. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
Retrieved February 18, 2021,  from https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-
Papers/Issues/2019/05/01/Fiscal-Policies-for-Paris-Climate-Strategies-from-Principle-to-Practice-46826 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 53  
 
Up to 1% of GDP in 
additional revenue 
by 2030 37  through 
implementation 
activities of the 
National Carbon 
Coordination Hub  
At least 274 million 
tons of CO 2 from 
forest carbon 38 , 
raising between 
USD 1.37 billion 39 
and 9.59 
billion 40 from 202 2      
to 2041      
At least 1 billion soil 
organic tons  with 
carbon content 
valued 41 
Alternative revenue 
models for hybrid 
adaptation and 
resilience projects, 
and cleaner devices 
like commercial 
solar rooftop arrays 
and modernized 
cooking stoves, 
among others 
 
Figure 6: Tax Revenue as a percentage of GDP 
 
37 International Monetary Fund (IMF)  Fiscal Affairs Department (2019, May 1). Fiscal Policies for Paris Cl imate 
Strategies—from Principle to Practice (Policy Paper No. 19/010). Policy Papers. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
Retrieved February 18, 2021, from https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-
Papers/Issues/2019/05/01/Fiscal-Policies-for-Paris-Climate-Strategies-from-Principle-to-Practice-46826  
38 GoB. 2020. Tree and Forest Resources of Bang ladesh: Report on the Bangladesh Forest Inventory. Forest 
Department, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of the People’s Republic of 
Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Retrieved March 8, 2021, from http://bfis.bforest.gov.bd/library/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/BFI-Report_final_08_02_2021.pdf  
39 274 million tons of CO2 x USD 5 per ton (Note: voluntary carbon markets may have higher prices than the current 
accessible projects under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and the price of carbon is expected to rise, 
especially as the IMF seeks to set a price floor, mirroring the G7 tax reform drive to set a minimum rate in 
international corporate taxation.) 
40 274 million tons of CO2 x USD 35 per ton  
41 GoB. 2020. Tree and Forest Resources of Bangladesh: Report on the Bangladesh Forest Inventory. Forest 
Department, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of the People’s Republic of 
Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Retrieved March 8, 2021, from  http://bfis.bforest.gov.bd/library/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/BFI-Report_final_08_02_2021.pdf 54 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022      We will conduct a feasibility study and prioritization strategy for 
carbon pricing mechanisms and create a strategy for the 
National Carbon Finance Hub , including taking into 
consideration the implementation of Bangladesh National 
Action Plan for Short-Lived Climate Pollutants.  
MoEFCC 
2022      We will audit carbon assets (e.g., soil, forest, renewable energy, 
blue, and modernized cooking stoves) in  coordination with the 
Bangladesh Forest Department and other relevant agencies           
MoPEMR 
2023      We will set up a National Carbon Finance Coordination Hub.  MoPEMR 
2024      We will implement a monitoring and evaluation system for 
carbon pricing with support from the National Carbon Finance 
Coordination Hub. 
MoEFCC 
2025      We will implement carbon pricing or tax with dividends that 
disproportionately benefit low -income households, and carbon 
pricing. 
MoPEMR 
2026      We will commit resource gains from the domestic carbon 
financing to locally led adaptation and loss and damage. 
MoPEMR 
2030 We will integrate with international carbon markets in order to 
mobilize additional resources for locally led adaptation and loss 
and damage. 
MoEFCC 
 
 
Carbon financing regimes are a policy & regulatory measure that supports Covid -19 
Recovery Interventions42 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience 
Results and Benefits: 
Supports 1.5-degree goal 
Builds long-term resilience 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Skills development 
High economic multiplier 
Contribution to the productive asset base 
Support for long-term transformation 
Positive environmental and social outcomes  
 
 
 
42 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 55  
 
SDGs 
SDG 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDG 12: Responsible 
Consumption and Production 
SDG 13: Climate Action 
SDG 15: Life on Land   
Key Measures 
Carbon marketplace setup 
Monitoring and evaluation system setup 
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
International resources for 
platform setup and access 
to tools for enhanced 
monitoring and evaluation 
National budget support via 
8FYP through 
modernization of tax policy 
Private sector tax revenue 
contributions 56 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Key Priority Area 4. Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk Financing 
and Management 
 
4A. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Financial Protection and 
Productivity Enhancement 
 
We will support the building of a new system that prioritizes needs -responsive 
financial protection, supports proactive risk management, risk reduction, and 
immediate liquidity needs, as well as investment support for MSMEs, especially 
women-led and owned MSMEs. According to the 8FYP, outside agriculture, micro and 
small enterprises are the largest sources of employment in both rural and urban areas 
in manufacturing and services. Moreover, according to the World Bank, the financing 
gap for MSMEs is USD 2.8 billion.43 
 
Increased resilience reduces the background risk from potential future disasters. This 
can have immediate and significant development benefits, even if disasters do not 
occur for a long time. Key benefits include economic gains from positive risk -taking 
(e.g., new enterprises and innovation); investments in productive assets (e.g., in small-
scale agriculture); extending planning horizons (e.g., for building up savings); and an 
increase in land values. All these lead to job creation, rising incomes, greater 
productivity, and overall economic growth.  
 
MSMEs contribute to 75% of employment, 25% of GDP, 40% of manufacturing output, 
and at least 75% of export earnings. 44 Increased climate-related risk means growing 
economic losses which warrants protecting MSMEs, the bedrocks of the economy, 
against climate impa cts to maintain and strengthen current growth levels and 
safeguard jobs.  
 
Key measures to support MSMEs include improving financial structures through 
innovative and alternative financing platforms (e.g., risk sharing facilities, factoring, 
warehouse rece ipt finance, and/or start -up capital policies) to meet the needs of 
MSMEs.45 Opportunities to enhance productivity include more efficient equipment 
and lower power costs. Moreover, supporting linkages between MSMEs and large 
corporations can facilitate increased participation in global supply chains and 
enhanced participation in value chains.  
 
43 World Bank (2019). Financing Solutions For Micro, Small And Medium Enterprises In Bangladesh. Retrieved 
February 22, 2021, from      http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/995331545025954781/Financing-
Solutions-for-Micro-Small-and-Medium-Enterprises-in-Bangladesh.pdf 
44  Vulnerable Twenty Group (V20) (2019, September). Sustainable Insurance  Facility (SIF): Solutions to Build 
Resilient Micro Enterprises Small and Medium: HIgh -Level V20 Needs and Support Assessment.Munich Climate 
Insurance Initiative (MCII). Retrieved February 19, 2021, from https://climate-insurance.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/DRAFT_V20_High-Level_Needs_and_Support_Assessment_Sept_2019.pdf 
45  Vulnerable Twenty Group (V20) (2019, September). Sustainable Insurance Facility (SIF): Solutions to Build 
Resilient Micro Enterprises Small and Medium: HIgh -Level V20 Needs and Suppor t Assessment.Munich Climate 
Insurance Initiative (MCII). Retrieved February 19, 2021, from https://climate -insurance.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/DRAFT_V20_High-Level_Needs_and_Support_Assessment_Sept_2019.pdf Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 57  
 
This builds on the 8FYP, which includes greater institutional and financial support to 
micro and small enterprises by converting the SME Foundation to the “Small Business 
Agency,” a one -stop support for technology, training, marketing, and re gulatory 
improvements. We will work in close collaboration with the Bangladesh Bank on the 
financing side to introduce innovative financial solutions involving ICT to improve 
MSMEs’ access to commercial bank credit through low -cost approaches to loan 
applications, approvals, and supervision. We will also develop credit guarantee 
schemes to reduce credit risks and to provide start-up capital to MSMEs. At least 15% 
of cottage industries and MSMEs credit lines will be provided to women entrepreneurs 
by 2022, complementing the ccGAP to promote women’s access to financial 
instruments.  
 
The V20’s Sustainable Insurance Facility aims to develop domestic and regional 
insurance actors' portfolios to deliver climate and disaster risk products to market for 
MSMEs. In a ddition, there should be strategic premium support from development 
partners (either in the form of a premium subsidy or capitalization support) to enable 
sustainable private sector uptake of these products in cooperation with the SME 
Foundation and Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operatives. 
Bangladesh is a member of the InsuResilience  Global Partnership, a collaboration of 
the G7, G20+ and V20 . Its targets represent national ambitions to progress towards 
and beyond the Partnership’s Vision 2025 to ensure 500 million vulnerable people are 
covered against disaster and climate shocks by pre -arranged risk finance and 
insurance.  
 
According to the 2nd Climate Vulnerability Monitor, economic losses from climate -
fueled disasters such as drought, floods and storms are expected to reach USD 4.075 
billion per year by 2030. Related habitat losses such as reduced labor productivity and 
sea level rise are expected to reach USD 50.62 billion per year by 2030. 46 Maximized 
climate and disaster risk financing solutions can reduce those losses in the future.  
 
Livelihood protection (including for women) in ecologically fragile areas is a priority in 
the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP). Access to 
reliable, affordable, and sustainable energy will provide communities — and especially 
women — opportunities to manage their own businesses, such as an ice -making 
business in a fishing community to preserve the catch, or other enterprises. 
 
Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk Management and Financing Strategy 
 
The strategy comprises a comprehensive set of climate and disaster risk financing 
and insurance (CDRFI) instruments led by the Ministry of Finance. This will be crucial 
for achieving resilience and enabling adaptation investme nt but clear guidance is 
needed on applying the strategy, beginning with ensuring we have an overview and 
understanding of existing CDRFI instruments and to which risk layer to apply them.  
 
46 Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) and Fundación Dara Internacional (DARA) (2012). Country Profile: Bangladesh. 
Climate Vulnerability Monitor, 2nd Edn.: A Guide to the Cold Calculus of A Hot Planet. Retrieved February 16, 2021, 
from       https://daraint.org/wp-content/themes/dara/pdf/Bangladesh.pdf 58 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
 
Resilience baselines and integrated investment portfolios are sti ll lacking, and this 
strategy aims to close that gap. Using the risk -layering approach in the strategy to 
build resilience, we will link planned adaptation with CDRFI instruments to achieve the 
most cost -effective reduction in exposure to climate risks. Wh at will integrate 
investments in risk reduction (adaptation), risk retention (e.g., budgetary allocations 
for contingency funds for low -impact, high -frequency events), risk transfer on and 
across different levels (e.g., for high -impact, low(er) frequency e vents) and 
contingency financing, can also be used to repair the nation’s most critical 
infrastructure. 
 
As a starting point, we will collect data to determine key performance indicators of 
financing and insurance in the natural catastrophe sector to asses s/prove the 
sustainability of risk financing and insurance markets. This includes, for example, 
supply side (loss ratio, solvency concerns) and demand side (coverage ratios, natural 
catastrophe losses, declined coverage etc.). This data may be supported by  V20 
collaboration on a global public –private partnership for analytics to close the 
protection gap, with support from the G20+ and V20 InsuResilience Global 
Partnership. The data may be hosted in the Insurance Development and Regulatory 
Authority (IDRA). The various CDRFI instruments can complement and enable the 
resourcing of adaptation investments to be applied in a coordinated manner, as 
indicated in the Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework  (BCFF). 47  Similar 
developments in climate policy in the areas of  planning, budgeting and performance 
management of climate finance by implementing the BCFF can garner “learning 
dividends” from projects such as Inclusive Budgeting and Financing For Climate 
Resilience (IBFCR) of the Government of Bangladesh.48 
 
Moreover, a comprehensive program of social protection may be included in the 
Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk Management and Finance Strategy to 
enable a transformation in poverty reduction and social inclusion. This can be 
delivered through Adaptive Social  Protection (ASP).  This means integrating social 
protection with 1) climate and disaster risk management and 2) adaptation 
investments. An example of ASP is when droughts are anticipated and the program 
thus scales up conditional cash transfer via the social safety net to ensure a quick and 
effective response. This can also include linking public works with social safety nets 
where able-bodied adults work on rebuilding or other value generating activities for 
cash or food. As for connecting work within the climate risk insurance-MSMEs-social 
protection continuum, it would be advisable to examine a combination of social 
 
47 Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework includes that the “existing insurance policy needs to be reviewed, in 
partnership with Insurance Development and Regulatory Authority (IDRA), to identify areas where innovative tools 
related to climate risk transfer issues can be included. Different challenges related to insurance access by specific 
climate vulnerable communities will also be identified and addressed. This will improve their adaptive capacity. 
The results of pilots carried out by different NGOs including  the potential of micro-insurance as a complement to 
adaptation actions should also be reviewed to propose relevant tools to IDRA.” 
48    Inclusive Budgeting and Financing for Climate Resilience (IBFCR) | UNDP in Bangladesh. Retrieved from 
https://www.bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/projects/inclusive-budgeting-and-financing-for-climate-
resilience--ibfcr-.html Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 59  
 
insurance and climate risk insurance approaches, as well as considering the 
combination of labor market programs and climate risk insurance approaches. 
 
 
Figure 7: Economic Losses from Climate and Disaster Risks 
 
 
Enhancing financial protection and productivity for MSMEs to enable . . .  
Extended financial protection against 
climate-related disasters for 50% (~15 
million) of the most vulnerable of the 
population by 2025 and 100% by 2030 
(~30 million) subject to international 
financial support for insurance 
premium subsidies. These can be 
tapered over time as internal market 
sustainability is achieved and market 
scale increases alongsid e technical 
assistance and capacity building for the 
national resilience bond industry. 
Climate and 
financial risk 
and 
opportunity 
literacy 
training for 
50% of MSMEs 
by 2025 and 
100% by 2030.  
Enhanced 
climate risk 
adjusted 
returns for 
MSMEs by 
10% by 2025  
and 20% by 
2030. 
BDT 237 
billion (USD 
2.8 billion) 
financing 
gap for 
MSMEs 
covered by 
2030. 
 
 
 
 
Target Milestones 60 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022      We will establish a unified framework for MSMEs to improve the 
effectiveness of MSMEs policies.  
MoI 
2022      We will undertake a study to define most vulnerable areas and 
segments in relation to locally led adaptation in Point 3A. 
MoLGRDC 
2022      We will begin the Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk 
Management and Financing Strategy by the Ministry of Finance 
through developing public perspectives and collecting data 
about climate and disaster risk financing and insurance key 
performance indica tors in the natural catastrophe sector in 
order to be able to assess/prove the sustainability of risk 
financing and insurance markets. This includes for example 
supply side (loss ratio, solvency concerns) and demand side 
(coverage ratio, national-catastrophe losses, declined coverage 
and so on.)  The data may be hosted in the Insurance 
Development and Regulatory Authority. 
MoF 
2022 We will develop a national policy and strategic framework for the 
risk transfer mechanism. 
MoF 
2022 We will conduct a pre -feasibility study for climate protection 
instruments for MSMEs and the vulnerable people that depend 
on them.  
MoI 
2023 We will complete the Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk 
Management and Financing Strategy. 
MoF 
2023 We will participate in the V20’s call for a Global Public Private 
Partnership in Risk Analytics and Resilience through the Global 
Risk Modelling Alliance and Global Resilience Index  to enable 
Research and Knowledge Management 
MoI 
2023 We will start to implement V20’s Sustainable Insurance Facility 
to develop domestic and regional insurance providers' ability to 
bring climate and disaster risk cover to market for MSMEs, with 
strategic premium support to promote sustainable private 
sector insurance uptake in cooperation with the SME  
Foundation. 
MoI Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 61  
 
Enhancing financial protection and productivity for MSMEs is a direct investment and 
policy reform measure that supports COVID-19 Recovery Interventions49 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Support for long-term transformation 
High employment intensity  
Positive e nvironmental and social 
outcomes 
Contribution to the productive asset 
base 
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDG 5: Gender Equality SDG 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDG 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
and Infrastructure 
SDG 10: Reduced Inequality SDG 13: Climate Action 
SDGs 17: Partnerships   
 
 
Key Measures 
Comprehensive Climate and Disaster Risk Management and Financing Strategy 
50%–100% of the population living below the poverty line and at risk of falling below the 
poverty line covered by financial protection against climate-related disaster 
50%–100% of MSMEs   trained in climate financial risk and opportunity 
Development of a national policy and strategic framework for risk transfer system 
BDT 237 billion (USD 2.8 billion) financing gap for MSMEs covered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 62 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private Sector 
International facilities such 
as the Sustainable 
Insurance Facility (SIF) and  
Global Index Insurance 
Facility (GIIF) 
 
Premium subs idies or 
capitalization support to 
support Comprehensive 
Climate and Disaster Risk 
Management and Financing 
Strategy 
National budget 
support  
Alternative financing platforms 
such as risk sharing facilities, 
factoring, warehouse receipt 
finance, and/or star t-up capital 
policies 
 
Public–private partnership for risk 
analytics and disaster risk 
financing through subsidies from 
developed and developing 
countries while banks, financial 
institutions and the (re)insurance 
industry develop risk analytics, 
and insura nce and investment 
products  
 
 
4B. Development of Climate -Resilient and Nature -Based Agricultural 
and Fisheries Supply and Value Chains including National Disaster Risk 
Financing and Management to Safeguard Food, Nutrition and Water 
Security 
              
Bangladesh’s economy is mostly agrarian and approximately 40% of its population 
depends on agriculture which is mostly regulated by climatic factors.  Changing 
climate and adverse effects pose a significant challenge to agriculture, food security, 
and livelihoods. The contribution of agriculture to GDP was 14.2 percent in FY2017 -
18, and it employs over 40 percent of the workforce. Agriculture is one of the most 
vulnerable sectors to climate variability, such as changes in temperature, rainfall 
patterns, and rise in floods and droughts. According to the Department of Agriculture 
Extension (DAE), flash flood submerged 141,000 hectares of farmland in six no rth-
eastern districts in 2017, affecting around 423,000 farmers . Therefore, the 
government of Bangladesh considers the agriculture sector as a critical one – 
particularly as it is very vulnerable to climate induced impacts. The government has 
taken a numbe r of initiatives to make the agricultural sector resilient but there are 
huge gaps in extension services and research, coordination among departments and 
governance issues such as accountability and transparency. Transplanted Aman rice 
is predominant in both coastal and flood prone areas. In coastal areas, salinity is lower 
during Aman season due to abundant rainfall. People cannot cultivate Boro (winter 
rice) due to the unavailability of fresh water in coastal areas and the limited 
accessibility in flood p rone areas. Limited aquaculture is practiced in flood prone 
areas. However, due to salinity intrusion, there should be adaptive agricultural Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 63  
 
practices in the region.  Shrimp culture in ghers is common in coastal areas though it 
makes the soil and water of those areas more saline. Crab and eel fish (kuchia) culture 
are increasing gradually. Climate adaptive agricultural practices are being introduced 
by the Government entities as farmers lose their crops in two consecutive seasons 
and the aggregate of losses reaches up to 100%. Relevant ministries like MoWCA are 
involved in addressing these challenges as women are largely involved in agriculture 
and livestock, particularly during the post -harvest period and in taking care of 
livestock. Water technology includ ing rainwater harvesting and context -specific 
solutions that reduce salinity induced vulnerability remain imperative for further 
research and development in fragile environments. 
 
The 8FYP , National Agriculture Policy  and the National Adaptation Plan (NAP)  
prioritizes productivity improvements to raise yields; reduce climate vulnerability; and 
promote diversification to non-crop agriculture, fishing, livestock, and dairy products. 
Therefore, in accordance with the 8FYP , National Agriculture Policy and the NAP, the 
strategy will be to ensure a profitable and sustainable agricultural production system 
and to further increase agricultural diversification while maintaining food and nutrition 
security by improving farm productivity, the supply of inputs, pric e policy support, 
water supply, farm credit, and marketing support.  
 
We will adapt agricultural, fisheries, livestock and poultry supply chains to climate 
change and upgrade agroforestry systems by improving access to agro -
meteorological services. We will support research in developing climate-resilient plant 
varieties (cultivars), improving production and management techniques along the 
supply chain, and introducing risk transfer schemes for key supply chain actors. Such 
solutions include integrated mangrove-shrimp cultivation to sequester blue carbon.50 
This will complement and align with the “Sustainable Fishery Development Project” 
and the “Community-based Climate Resilient Fisheries and Aquaculture Development 
in Bangladesh” project supported by the Global Environment Facility.51,52 
 
Formalizing supply chains through reinforced linkages between supply chain actors, 
as well as increased linkages between formal financial institutions and mature 
farmers/fisherfolk/enterprise groups would support the expansion of agriculture and 
fisheries finance via more innovative operating models. Examples from South Asia of 
high-value, nature -based solutions include seaweed cultivation, floating gardens, 
aqua-geoponics and vertical farming that uses rainwater in sa linity-prone coastal 
 
50 Ahmed, N., Thompson, S., & Glaser, M. (2018). Integrated mangrove-shrimp cultivation: Potential for blue carbon 
sequestration. Ambio, 47(4), 441–452. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-017-0946-2 
51 World Bank. (2019, July 11). Sustainable Fishery Development Project (P171352): Project Information Document 
(PID) (Report No: PIDC27261). Retrieved February 19, 2021, from 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/517901563252361747/text/Concept-Project-Information-
Document-PID-Sustainable-Fishery-Development-Project-P171352.txt 
52 Global Environment Facility (n.d.). Community-based Climate Resilient Fisheries and Aquaculture Development 
in Bangladesh: Project Details (GEF Project ID: 5636). Retrieved February 19, 2021, from 
https://www.thegef.org/project/community-based-climate-resilient-fisheries-and-aquaculture-development-
bangladesh 64 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
communities. These are innovative and culturally sensitive solutions in the context of 
climate-exposed communities.  
 
Another option is scaled -up promotion of practices such as extension of farm 
mechanization, micro -irrigation to impro ve water usage efficiency and support for 
organic seeds, especially in communities with limited access to information and 
resources. Building upon the most successful examples would help address existing 
bottlenecks including governance issues, lack of cap acity for monitoring, reporting, 
and validating quantitative indicators.   
 
Extreme heat can severely reduce the yields of rice, wheat, and other cereal crops . 
According to the Department of Agriculture Extension, a 4°C extreme increase in 
temperature will result in a 28 percent reduction of rice and a 68 percent reduction of 
wheat output. A cute weather events and disasters are an ever -present risk. 
Consequently, risk-averse households and firms typically avoid long-term investments 
in productive assets, en trepreneurial activities are restricted, and planning horizons 
are shortened, leading to lost development opportunities. In Bangladesh over 1 million 
hectares of cultivable land are already affected by salinity intrusion caused by slow - 
and rapid-onset events e.g. the net cultivated area in Satkhira decreased by 7 per cent 
from 1996 to 2008. Crop losses due to SLR -induced salinity intrusion have been 
estimated as 200,000 metric tonnes, with salinity (+5 ppt) of irrigation water expected 
to further reduce farm productivity by up to 50 percent. We will support, among other 
measures, the deployment of genetically improved crop varieties with resilience to 
climate-linked events such as heat waves, flooding submergence, and salinization. 
The development of a heat-tolerant rice variety is an example.53   
 
Risk reduction or management can have immediate and significant economic 
benefits. Working in extreme heat, for example, can have serious health implications, 
particularly for elderly people and communities with the least access to health care. A 
feasible investment that addresses this problem can also boost the overall 
productivity of farmers. Moreover, to ensure that adequate access to financial support 
liquidity is made available for low -income groups, social pr otection schemes will be 
introduced.  
 
Food security54 can be achieved by ensuring a safe and nutritionally adequate food 
supply both at the national and household level. Women play a vital role in agriculture, 
be it the cultivation of land or processing of the product. In addition, Nutrition security 
can be achieved through intensifying high value crops' (pulses, oil seed,vegetables, 
 
53 Ahmad, R. (2021, April 22). After heatwave comes heat -tolerant rice. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved June 18, 2022, 
from https://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/agriculture/2021/04/22/after-heatwave-comes-heat-tolerant-
rice 
54 Arimod, M.; Hawkes, C.; Ruel, M.T.; Sifri, Z.; Berti, P.R.; Leroy, J.L.; Low, J.W.; Brown, L.R.; Frongillo, E.A. 2011. 
Agricultural interventions and nutrition: Lessons from the past and new evidence. In: Thompson, B. Amoroso, L. 
(eds). Combating micronutrient deficiencies: Food -based approaches. Oxfordshire (UK). CAB International FAO. 
ISBN 978-1-84593-714-0. pp. 41-75. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 65  
 
fruits, tuber, spice) cultivation. Efforts must be taken to make the land available during 
rabi (winter) season judiciously accommodating these crops in the cropping systems 
instead of traditional mono crop cultivation. In general, technological change, 
utilization of productive resources and different types of training for women in 
agriculture are aimed at augmenting land and labor productivity and, therefore, have 
profound implications for labor absorption and employment in agriculture. It is 
essential to guarantee that women have access to proper training in agriculture land, 
materials and equipment.  
 
To prevent gender-disproportionate harms from climate-driven shocks and disasters, 
it is vital to ensure the formulation and implementation of gender-responsive policies 
which aim to increase both women’s agency and access to the productive resources, 
markets, training, and tech nology required to enhance agricultural productivity and 
output. Equally important is to ensure alternative livelihood opportunities for women 
affected by climate change.  In line with the ccGAP, to sustain the dual expansion of 
climate-resilient livelihoo ds (e.g., climate resilient cropping, saline resistant 
vegetables, etc.) along with increased engagement and participation of women in 
such activities, capacity building and financial inclusion in terms of access to 
concessional loans/grants and insurance products are two major ways to empower 
marginalized women while providing safety nets in climate -vulnerable communities. 
Additionally, policy-based interventions to strengthen market infrastructure in hard-to-
reach areas will underpin locally led adaptation and resilience.  
 
The V20 Sustainable Insurance Facility’s provision of climate and disaster risk 
financing and insurance should include premium subsidies and capitalization support 
to address both market inefficiencies and inequitable coverage. This cou ld 
simultaneously overcome demand and supply challenges for optimal insurance 
coverage against extreme weather events. Depending on the target group, such as 
low-income households, MSMEs  or governments, premium subsidies and 
capitalization support through shared risk with developed and developing country 
governments can be used at various scales. 
 
Our approach contrasts starkly with the traditional after -the-fact, loss -centered 
approach for disaster risk management. It focuses on the benefits of saving live s, 
reducing losses, and promoting effective recovery from disasters. Moreover, 
international cooperation for nature -based solutions can be prioritized in order to 
phase out investment, trade, and export credit practices that drive deforestation and 
ecosystem loss. 
 
Agricultural exports and agro -processing and new sectors of agricultural 
commercialization will be promoted to increase farm income and employment in non-
crop activities, especially fisheries, fruit, vegetables, and dairy products. The 
implementation of the first phase of the BDP  2100 public investment program will 
strengthen water and drought management, lower flood risk, reduce waterlogging, and 
reduce soil salinity. P riority agriculture and rural infrastructure will be preserved and 
strengthened, increasing GDP by 1% by 2025. 66 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
This flagship plan will be a crucial step towards a green, nature -based, and resilient 
recovery from the COVID -19 crisis. The MCPP will help to strengthen rapid rural 
transformation, women's empowerment, poverty eradication, universal access to 
modern and sustainable agriculture, and power and energy security. We expect the 
plan to have profound effects as we work to tackle climate change, manage disasters, 
and protect the environment. 
 
A good example of sustainable agriculture is initiatives of the the Bangladesh Rubber 
Board, which is  building sustainable development through patronizing rubber 
cultivation, creating entrepreneurs and balancing resilience to climate changes. 
Another example of this is  seaweed cultivation with its climate resilience and 
development benefits. It is a low or even negative carbon industry, resilient to climate 
shocks, does not require significant capital to be established, is export -focused, and 
offers a variety of forms of employment suitable for many different circumstances. 
Well-designed seaweed cultivation integrates well with other activities in the blue 
economy, for example by raising water quality and sustainably supporting other 
commercially valuable species. As Bangladesh has a large suitable continental shelf 
already identified around Cox's Bazaar and the coast south of Khulna, seaweed pilot 
schemes should be explored based upon marketing partnerships with international 
purchasers and global best practice for cultivation. Once established, these pilot 
schemes would then form the basis of a growing and profitable local industry.  
 
COVID-19 has worsened Bangladesh's overall economic condition, putting vulnerable 
groups, including women and farmers, at further risk in terms of their socio-economic 
standing access to basic nee ds (e.g., food, water, and shelter). Human health and 
environmental health are intricately linked as detrimental changes in the environment 
will eventually affect human health. It is important to take necessary measures to 
mitigate the impacts of climate c hange and to create a sustainable agricultural 
system. 
 
Development of Climate -Resilient Agricultural and Fisheries Supply and Value 
Chains including National Disaster Risk Financing and Management to Safeguard 
Food Security, Nutrition and Water Security to enable...  
Supply chain access to agro-
meteorological services by 
50% by 2025 and 100% by 
2030 
Enhanced productivity by 
2.5% per annum by 2025 
and 5% per annum by 2030 
A reduction in the 
financial protection gap 
by 30% by 2025 and 
100% by 2030 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 67  
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 Complete a disaster risk financing and insurance strategy for 
agricultural and fisheries supply chains including the provision 
of parametric insurance options/social protection schemes in 
addition to the provision of premium subsidies and 
capitalization support. 
MoA 
2023 Create a special fund for the development of climate -resilient 
and nature-based agricultural and fisheries supply and value 
chains 
MoA 
2023 Conduct a supply chain vulnerability analysis and cost-benefit 
analysis into financial and operational business impacts, as 
well as value -engineering prospects through stakeholder 
consultation. 
MoA 
2024 Make available climate data and information services, 
adequate risk assessment and financial modelling tools. 
MoDMR 
2025 Finalize an anticipatory and comprehensive risk management 
plan with multi -hazard early warning systems and weather -
indexed protection and financing tools, including the provision 
of social protection schemes 
MoDMR 
2025 Improve supply chain access to agro -meteorological services 
by 50% 
MoA 
2025 Enhanced productivity by 2.5% per annum and 5% per annum 
by 2030 
MoA 
2030 Improve supply chain access to agro -meteorological services 
by 100% 
MoA 
2030 Doubling production and income through agro-processing and 
financial protection  
MoA 
 
Development of Climate -Resilient Agricultural and Fisheries Supply and Value 
Chains including National Disaster Risk Financing and Management to Safeguard 
Food, Nutrition and Water Security is a direct investment measure that supports 
Covid-19 Recovery Interventions55 such as . . .  
 
55  https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/647876/climate-disaster-resilience-low-carbon-covid-19-
recovery.pdf 68 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks  
Targets disadvantaged groups 
Covid-19 Recovery Dividend: 
High employment intensity 
Skills development 
Strong supply chain multiplier 
Contribution to the productive asset 
base 
Support for long -term 
transformation 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDGs 2: Zero Hunger SDGs 6: Clean Water and 
Sanitation 
SDGs 8: Decent Work 
and Economic Growth 
SDGs 9: Industry, 
Innovation, and 
Infrastructure 
SDGs 10: Reduced 
Inequality 
SDGs 12: Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production 
SDGs 13: Climate Action SDGs 14: Live Below Water SDGs 15: Live on Land 
SDGs 17: Partnerships   
 
 
Key Measures 
Enhance agricultural productivity towards food security in the Coastal Belt, Barind 
Areas, Char and Wetlands Lands (new deposits of soil on or near water) Haor, and 
Hill Tracts 
Promote decentralized, localized industry activity for food processing and 
marketing in order to secure a higher proportion of the value chain to communities 
who are generating the primary agricultural outputs 
Enhance low -cost, climate -resilient, environment friendly, context -specific, and 
culturally sensitive food security optio ns (e.g., vertical farming/rooftop gardening 
and hydroponic for urban agriculture and wetland agriculture and floating bed, 
sorjan system for in salinity prone rural agriculture)  
Develop innovative financing mechanisms in agricultural production i.e., th rough 
innovative climate -adaptive insurance in addition to the provision of premium 
subsidies and capitalization support, which can encourage the insurance sector to 
invest in lower-risk products and improve weather-based insurance  
Sustainable supply of timber and non-timber forest products Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 69  
 
Strengthen participatory forestry in forest and Trees outside Forest (ToF) areas to 
provide climate resilient livelihood 
Ensure water security in both coastal and hilly areas through rainwater harvesting 
watershed management integration through use of land, vegetation, and water in a 
geographically discrete drainage area for the benefit of the communities residing 
therein, with the objective of protecting or conserving the hydrologic services the 
watershed provides and of reducing or avoiding negative downstream or 
groundwater impacts 
Ecosystem restoration through reforestation and afforestation for watershed 
management and water security 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
International resources for 
financial protection and 
technology transfer in 
advanced research and 
development opportunities 
along with research to foster 
South–South and North –
South collaboration 
 
Through the V20                
Sustainable Insurance 
Facility, enabling access to 
premium subsidies and 
capitalization support 
through shared risk with 
developed and developing 
country governments.  
National budget from 
the Bangladesh Climate 
Change Trust Fund and 
Bangladesh Delta Plan 
2100  
Public–private partnership 
and investment for better 
agricultural practices, 
minimal crop loss with 
food processing and value 
addition and maximized 
farmers’ output for food 
security 70 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Key Priority Area 5. Leveraging 21st-century technologies for well-being 
 
5A. Resilient Well-Being Programs 
 
The MCPP will support the strengthening of national initiatives in mental health and 
well-being to counteract the extreme vulnerability of people living with mental illness 
and physical and psychological disabilities. It will address the psychological 
dimensions of climate threat, considering that a single extreme cyclone has been 
shown to increase the prevalence of mental health issues in the general population by 
4%, whether they were directly affected by the cyclone or not. The national initiatives 
will include crisis preparedness and management for mental health training and 
capacity programs, trauma counseling, educational support, support programs for 
women and c hildren, support for children with special needs and general well -being 
programs to promote healthy, sustainable, and traditional lifestyles.   
 
Traditional forms of community living and livelihoods in Bangladesh are more attuned 
to the preservation of the  environment, and are associated, for example, with less 
reliance on fossil fuels for transport, artisanal forms of food production and gathering, 
traditional ingredients in foods, more regular exercise, and vibrant community 
activities, particularly periodic national and religious festivals. 
 
As Bangladesh continues its emergence journey of modernity and rapid and sustained 
socio-economic development, pressure on traditional forms of living and ways of life 
has increased, sometimes to the detriment of heal th, such as through chemicals 
added to food and the environment, compounded by much greater energy use and 
reliance on motorized transportation. At the same time, higher incomes allow for a 
general increase in leisure time that creates opportunities to engage in sport, outdoor 
activity, and traditional cultural pursuits. The MCPP promotes traditional Bangladesh 
culture, lifestyle, and livelihoods as integral to a prosperous future, with the benefits 
of sustained socio -economic development, while retaining t raditional national 
approaches to living and avoiding introduced practices that harm the environment and 
the well -being of the population. The  MCPP also foresees ways of strengthening 
vulnerable communities, increasing participation in pursuits that promot e physical 
and mental health through the promotion of local clubs, schools, and networks active 
in the performing arts, sport, and outdoor activity.  
 
Resilient Well -Being Programs will broadly focus on three areas with emphasis on 
promoting nature therapy through green health programs: 1) psychological well-being; 
2) physical well-being; 3) development of medicines for climate-related diseases. 
 
Psychological well -being can be included as part of the Crisis Preparedness and 
Management for Mental Health (CPM-MH) strand of the National Resilience Program 
that is currently being implemented by the Department of Disaster Management. It 
aims at strengthening disability-inclusive, gender-responsive, national and community 
capacity to address recurrent and major disasters. A series of training of trainers 
(ToTs) sessions under this program aims to develop a pool of trainers that can Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 71  
 
respond to crises and provide mental health support. These trainers form a strong 
network of additional crisis responders. 
 
The operational and financial capacity of the CPM -MH program will be strengthened 
by considering alternative mental health services in the country to provide culturally 
appropriate socially inclusive services; broadening the base of trainers and trainees to 
include a diversified group of trainers especially at community levels; updating the 
training manual to expand information within chapters and include further sections on 
crisis aftermath. A key program under the MCPP is Community-Based Psychological 
First Aid to alleviate the mental health effects of disasters, including specialized 
support for women, children and children with special needs. This will entail provision 
of basic psychological support by general community members to their families, 
friends, neighbors and community during disasters or other stressors such as climate-
induced migration.   
      
Physical well -being through traditional ways of living supported by modern 
technology, while enabling sustained high socio -economic development, including  
sports such as cricket, Ha -du-du, football, handball, Kabaddi, Nouka Baich, Butthan, 
Kho Kho, Boli Khela, Lathi Khe la, rugby, cycling, swimming, volleyball, and basketball 
as well as performance, for example folk and ethnic music, dance, theater such as 
baul, manipuri, and jaatra, complemented by ethically sourced food and traditional 
cuisine. Initiatives on climate awareness among the general population using mass 
media will also be strengthened.  
 
Existing initiatives of the 8FYP and 7FYP will be further strengthened under the MCPP. 
These initiatives include improved roads, safe drinking water, developed water 
management, and high -speed internet and making sure that standard consumer 
goods are available in rural and semi-urban areas.  
 
Additionally, the ongoing projects of “My Village, My Town” program to reduce rural -
urban migration include:  
● Setting up economic zones in semi -urban areas to ensure jobs for the local 
population 
● Constructing green mini-stadiums at upazila (county) level to promote healthy 
living through sports and exercise with special facilities for women, and also 
serving as temporary evacuation centers or cyclone shelters for people 
affected by climate-induced migration 
● Providing input support and training to ensure adequate inputs for sc ientific 
cultivation in agriculture and fisheries 
● Providing input support and training to facilitate floating bed vegetable gardens 
and hydroponic   
● Providing infrastructure to preserve surface water for use and to facilitate the 
recharging of aquifers 72 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
● Establishing a co -operative system in rural areas and increasing off -farm job 
facilities for the unemployed and informally employed in the agriculture sector  
● Improving food and medicine storage in the event of flooding and other 
disasters 
● Providing boat ho spitals in coastal regions to serve the dual purpose of 
providing medical help and evacuation, including support for women’s health 
and psychological first -aid for trauma from natural disasters and climatic 
events 
● Prioritizing clean air, pure water, health y soil ensuring soil degradation 
neutrality (LDN) and pandemic resilience. 
 
As Bangladesh transitions out of LDC status, the vibrant pharmaceuticals industry 
brings industrialization and jobs, as well as access to essential medicines for 
Bangladeshis and p eople in other developing countries and LDCs. It is therefore 
essential to develop the pharmaceuticals industry for climate -related diseases and 
cancers with a research, development, and deployment (RD&D) and investment 
program for climate -related diseases  in partnership with the national adaptation 
programs, including through joint ventures with international pharmaceutical 
companies.  
 
 
Resilient Well-Being Programs...  
Build psychological well -
being through community -
based psychological first 
Aid 
Build physical well -being to 
deliver “My Village, My Town” 
Develop the 
pharmaceutical industry 
to tackle for climate -
related diseases 
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 We will pilot a community-based psychological first aid. MoHFW 
2022 We will establish improved food and medicine storage options. MoHFW 
2022 We will develop a pharmaceuticals research, development & 
deployment (RD&D) and investment program for climate-related 
diseases in partnership with the health national adaptatio n 
program, including through joint ventures with international 
pharmaceutical companies. 
MoHFW 
2023 We will establish additional state-supported boat hospitals. MoHFW Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 73  
 
2024 Formation of a specific cell to support the development of a 
pharmaceutical industry for climate-related disease 
MoHFW 
2025 We will strengthen implementation of and utilization green mini-
stadiums at all upazilas (administrative regions) 
MoLGRDC 
2025 We will establish community -based psychological first -aid 
programs in 50% of vulnerable areas/communities. 
MoHFW 
2026 We will launch pharmaceuticals for climate-related diseases. MoHFW 
2030 We will establish community -based psychological first -aid 
programs in 100% of vulnerable areas/communities. 
MoHFW 
2030 Bangladesh will become a pharmaceutical developer for 
climate- related diseases. 
MoHFW 
 
 
Resilient Well -Being Programs  is a direct investment measure that supports 
COVID-19 Recovery Interventions 56 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks  
Targets disadvantaged groups 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDGs      3: Good Health and 
Well-being 
SDGs      5: Gender Equality SDGs      11: Sustainable 
Cities and Communities 
 
 
 
Key Measures 
Additional ToTs completed under the CPM-MH program. 
 
56  Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low-Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 74 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Community-based psychological first-aid program set up in disaster-prone areas. 
Green mini-stadiums constructed at upazila level utilized round the year 
Registered local clubs, schools, and networks active in the performance arts, sport and 
outdoor pursuits supported in all upazilas. 
Development of a pharmaceuticals research, development & deployment (RD&D) and 
investment program. 
Formation and operationalization of pharmaceuticals research, development and 
deployment (RD&D) cell within Ministry of Health 
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
Support in the creation of 
economic zones, the 
psychological first -aid 
program, and 
pharmaceuticals research, 
development & deployment 
(RD&D). Investment 
program for climate related 
diseases, including through 
joint ventures 
National Budget Support 
via allocation of funds 
Industry capital 
investment in economic 
zones 
 
 
 
5B. Accelerated Digital Revolution 
 
The MCPP will align with the government’s Digital Bangladesh programs to ensure 
efficiency, transparency, and accountability and pave the pathway for Bangladesh 
walking towards 4IR. This program will ensure delivery of government services to the 
doorsteps of citizens through the use of modern technology.  
 
One of the drivers of the Digital Bangladesh initiative is e -governance, commonly 
called Digital Governance. Through an online service delivery gateway users can apply 
and pay for 169 government services such as land records, birth registration, 
telemedicine, and passports, and apply for overseas jobs online. This single online 
platform for government entities aims to make administration paperless and more 
efficient.  All government-to-person (G2P) for example, social safety net payments and 
person-to-government (P2G) payments will be automated by 2022. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 75  
 
The government of Bangladesh estimates that around 7.7% 57 of the country’s 
population makes payments through mobile financial services as of 2020. By 2030, 
we will  increase this coverage to 25% of the population by promoting use of 
interoperable digital payment platforms, pro -internet banking policies, and micro -
merchant support in provision of mobile financial services. As per the 8th FYP 
financial inclusion, assim ilation of the otherwise excluded into the formal financial 
system by giving them access to financial products and services continues to be a 
key priority and extension of digital financial services (DFS) is a key component of 
national plans. The MCPP also foresees acceleration of initiative of the ICT Division 
to expand and deepen digital financial inclusion through innovative products and 
services such as ‘rural e -commerce’ to drive usage of electronic/online financial 
products/services (and vice -versa) b y people who are currently unbanked and 
underserved. 
 
The MCPP also foresees financial and policy support to banks, non -bank financial 
institutions (NBFI) and other equity funds that invest in or provide financial support to 
tech solution providers including e-commerce businesses that contribute to achieving 
SDGs, optimize traditional living, and promote well-being.   
 
However, to ensure that the benefits of Digital Bangladesh reach even the last -mile 
users, the National Telecommunications Policy 2016 aims to ensure “Telephone and 
Internet for All” with the following goals to be achieved by 2025: 
1. Increasing internet penetration to 90% 
2. Providing broadband facilities to 90% 
3. 50% of residences and organizations to have optical fiber connectivity  
 
While increasing  internet penetration and broadband will ensure access to digital 
solutions for all citizens, access to high-speed internet and 5G will increase the global 
competitiveness of Bangladesh by enabling the services of prof essionals and IT 
freelancers to be outsourced. Total value of IT export services including freelancing 
through the banking channel is USD 265.22 million in 2019-2020 financial year.  
 
Access to services online and the infrastructure to support remote work will reduce 
traffic congestion, air pollution and fuel usage. Moreover, the digital revolution can 
enable associations such as the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters 
Association (BGMEA) to establish a global platform to assist with export 
opportunities. 
 
 
 
 
 
57 Islam, P. (2020, October 8). Digital Bangladesh 2021: Payment systems and fintech. The Daily Star. Retrieved 
February 19, 2021, from  https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/news/digital-bangladesh-2021-payment-
systems-and-fintech-1974417 76 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Accelerated Digital Revolution to...  
Increase internet 
penetration to 90% 
Extend broadband facilities to 
90% 
Ensure 50% of 
residences and 
organizations have 
optical fiber 
connectivity 
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 All G2P and P2G payments automated ICT Division 
2026 In-line with the National Financial Inclusion Strategy, we will 
create an inclusive digital financial infrastructure including 
DFS, Fintech, Regtech etc. and effective interface using 
technology between financial products and services as well 
as delivery channels used by different providers  
ICT Division 
2030 We will increase internet penetration and broadband capacity 
to 100% 
ICT Division 
2030 70% of residences and organizations will have optical fiber 
connectivity 
ICT Division 
2030 We will ensure 25% o f the population makes payments 
through mobile financial services 
ICT Division 
2030 We will reduce paper usage in government offices and 
agencies by 30% of current consumption. 
ICT Division 
2030 Mobilize USD 350 million for 200 startups that promote well -
being, optimize traditional ways of living, and contribute to 
achieving SDGs     .  
ICT Division 
 
 
Accelerated Digital Revolution is a direct investment measure that supports Covid-19 
Recovery Interventions 58 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: Covid-19 Recovery Dividend: 
 
58 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 77  
 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Supports long-term decarbonization 
High employment intensity 
Skills development  
Strong supply chain 
Contribution to the productive asset 
base 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDGs      3: Good Health and 
Well-being 
SDGs      8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDGs      11: Sustainable 
Cities and Communities 
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
 National Budget Support 
via allocation of funds 
Industry capital 
investment in digital 
infrastructure 78 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Key Priority Area 6. Maximized Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and 
Power & Transportation Sector Resilience 
 
6A.  Maximized Renewable Energy Wealth, Energy Efficiency and Energy 
Storage Infrastructure       
 
Through the MCPP renewables roadmap, we will put Bangladesh on a path to energy 
resilience and independence by maximizing renewable energy and energy storage 
infrastructure, taking advantage of the deflationary price trajectory of domestic 
renewable electricity generation, energy efficiency and storage. Energy wealth 
utilization within the Mujib Borsho (centenary year) brings 100% energy access to the 
people of Bangladesh. Building off the up to 40% renewable energy by 2041 target and 
100% renewable energy by 2050 goal of the Climate Vulnerable Forum, resilience and 
energy independence will enable Bangladesh to become a net exporter of energy and 
a global participant in the green economy through technological innovation. To 
complement this trajectory, Bangladesh will reduce, displace, and pote ntially replace 
outdated and expensive technology to improve the balance of trade, reduce 
inflationary pressures and exposure to volatility, and improve the sector’s cost 
competitiveness. Specifically, reduced or even zero imports of coal, oil, diesel, and gas 
would insulate the economy from the ups and downs of volatile commodity markets 
providing valuable price stability while contributing positively to the balance of trade.  
 
The 8FYP highlights that renewable energy power supply in Bangladesh has not grown 
and reliance on imported fossil fuel does not align with global trajectories nor is it in 
keeping with the latest International Energy Agency 1.5°C scenario. And despite an 
increase in the price of power (up 40% between 2016 and 2020) in the country, t he 
power sector’s financial capability remains limited. The 8FYP further highlights that 
there is power overcapacity and so incremental renewables and storage options may 
be promoted to reduce prices and enable new business opportunities and 
employment. Th e 8FYP further notes that the increasing reliance on high -priced 
imported liquefied natural gas (LNG) and imported coal will increase the cost of 
producing electricity.  
 
Bangladesh recognizes that technological development in renewables and storage 
will undermine the competitiveness and return on investment of fossil fuel assets. 
Considering the deflationary price trajectory of renewable electricity generation and 
storage options, it is prudent to design the power system to encourage modernized 
technologies to take advantage of improved pricing and reliability and reduced 
exposure to inflationary pressures and international volatility.  
 
Previous global market management decisions have resulted in excessive reliance on 
power generation using imported coal, fossil gas, oil, and diesel with open -ended 
imported fuel obligations. These options are increasingly uncompetitive and carry 
ongoing foreign currency and commodity price risks — all of which raise overall 
stranded asset risk. Bangladesh will adopt m odernized management to take the 
energy system to the next stage of development by adopting the cost -effective and Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 79  
 
resilient technologies that currently reshape global energy markets with their more 
reliable and competitive power.  
 
The public and private sectors should take advantage of the falling price of solar 
power.  Solar energy components have declined significantly in price. In recent years, 
solar energy’s levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) can now compete with coal. Solar 
panels can also be insta lled on rooftops and water bodies such as dams instead of 
relying on agricultural land. For example, replacing diesel generators with solar -
powered irrigation systems can expand irrigation opportunities for agriculture and 
reduce costs — subject to the availability of lease financing.  
 
In addition to disadvantages such as price volatility, inflationary pressures, carbon 
emissions and pollution, fossil fuels also impose socio -economic costs on health. 
Luckily, these harms can be minimized by clean energy. A low-carbon trajectory could 
save Bangladesh a daily-adjusted life year cost per capita of USD 2100 (at purchasing 
power parity), taking into consideration both outdoor and indoor air pollution. This is 
equivalent to averting losses of USD 2.3 billion a year.59 
 
To foster regional cooperation, Bangladesh will take advantage of record -low solar 
power tariffs through renewable energy auctions across the region (India for example) 
to better deliver price stability, cost competitiveness and power sector resilie nce. 
Domestic energy security will be driven by investment in solar (rooftop, grounded and 
floating) including reclaimed land under Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100. Solar power will 
generate 2000MW for government buildings alone, in addition to offshore wind an d 
domestic storage capacity. Other opportunities include taking advantage of 
alternative power generation in the Bay of Bengal using predictable tidal power and 
conversion of the ocean’s thermal energy.  
 
Moreover, energy efficiency plays an important role  in building the power systems of 
the future. Bangladesh’s 2020 NDCs (Interim) note that the government aims to lower 
energy intensity (national primary energy consumption per unit of GDP) in 2030 by 
20% versus the 2013 level: A total of 95 million tonnes of oil equivalent or 113 billion 
cubic meters of gas equivalent is expected to be saved during the period. 
 
Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array & Energy Hubs 
Furthermore, considering Bangladesh’s land constraints, the flagship Bongoposagor 
Independence Giga Array, a hybrid adaptation and offshore wind mega project will be 
implemented for both domestic consumption and export to the region and beyond in 
the form of electricity and converted green hydrogen, set up potentially in coastal 
island in the Southern  region. A study of t he National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
 
59 Millyvirta, L. (2020, September). Air quality, health and toxics impacts of the proposed coal power cluster in 
Chattogram, Bangladesh. Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air (CREA). Retrieved February 19, 2021, from 
https://energyandcleanair.org/publication/air-quality-health-and-toxics-impacts-of-the-proposed-coal-power-
cluster-in-chattogram-bangladesh/ 80 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
(NREL), USA confirms that there are wind speeds of around 7.5 m/s,60 which is within 
the viable range for offshore generation  in Bangladesh . Thanks to technological 
development over the last 5 ye ars, equipment is now available to effectively harvest 
wind at almost every speed. Turbines designed for low speeds of (4.5 meters per 
second) and in the range of 6.5 to 7.5 m/s that can deliver 75% to 80% of their rated 
power at 7 m/s with hub heights tha t can reach 140m. In the spirit of maximizing 
opportunities for the delta, the giga array will include maximization of nature -based 
solutions such as planting mangroves to expand economic opportunities in fisheries, 
while encouraging fundraising via blue b onds to protect oceans and marine life, and 
to fund other marine projects.  
 
This output will be complemented by the strategic Energy Hubs Program which will 
progressively convert uneconomical coal and oil/diesel fired generation plants 
through recapitalization and transformation of existing fossil facilities into biomass 
waste-to-energy plants and advanced hydrogen production centers. The Energy Hubs 
Program will benefit from the ability to produce green hydrogen through electrolysis 
powered by wind energy  from the Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array at night 
when demand for electricity is low. Moreover, the offshore array can power an 
electrolyzer that operates in 'island mode' to power an electrolysis rig with no link to 
an electricity grid. Through the existing water resources available to participating 
power generation plants and via the logistics chains that already supply these plants, 
the green hydrogen produced by the Energy Hubs Program can:  
 
● Dovetail with the growing network of natural gas/LNG capacity in Bangladesh, 
where green hydrogen can be blended with natural gas to make up to 30% of 
the fuel and used in consumer gas networks and appliances without 
modification. 
 
● Support the growing share of hydrogen -propelled transportation including for 
regional aviation, heavy -duty trucking, fuel -cell vehicles, fuel -cell trains, 
passenger boats and shipping that would be promoted under the  MCPP that 
includes land and water transport.   
 
● Promote the overall optimization of Bangladesh’s energy capacity and g rid 
stability through a diversified, greening energy base.  
 
● Promote ocean energy innovation such as tidal power and ocean thermal 
energy conversion in the Bay of Bengal.  
 
 
60 Jacobson, M., Draxl, C., Jimenez, T., O’Neill, B., C apozzola, T., Lee, J.A.,  Vandenberghe, F. &  Haupt, S.E. (2018, 
September). Assessing the Wind Energy Potential in Bangladesh: Enabling Wind Energy Development with Data 
Products (NREL/TP-5000-71077). USAID and National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).  Retrieved March 1, 
2021, from https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/71077.pdf p.64 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 81  
 
● Promote the delivery of run -of-river hydroelectric power in areas with excess 
rainfall during monsoon season.  
 
● Position Bangladesh as an emerging exporter of high-value green hydrogen and 
offshore wind power.   
 
Such a hydrogen strategy could be supported by the Bangladesh Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (BCSIR) Hydrogen Energy Laboratory and commercialization 
through partnerships with participants in the gas, lubricants and related industries 
through investment tax credits and capitalization support.  
  
These landmark energy programs will generate a significant number of new, high -
quality jobs, with reconversion plants benefiting from dedicated upskilling initiatives 
for plant workers. Moreover, the Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array can further 
establish optimized artificial reefs on the base of each offshore wind installation to 
improve habitats for fisheries, yielding blue-economy benefits for Bangladesh.  
 
Bangladesh had a target of meeting 10% of power demand from renewable energy 
resources by 2020, but generation using renewable energy is still less than 3% of total 
electricity generation.61 However, a policy signal to identify with certainty competitive 
renewable energy zones on land, lakes, at sea, clusters of rooftops, and canals to be 
matched with incentives and relevant grid investment and development could be an 
opportunity to rapidly surpass the target while delivering domestically sourced power 
for lower prices and creating jobs.      
 
A complementary storage roadmap mandated by policy to optimize renewable energy 
and grid stability can encourage new market participants and investment. Phasing out 
the existing fossil fuel subsidies gradually, and redirecting them to loss and damage, 
adaptation, renewable energy, storage, and green hydrogen programs with an eventual 
phaseout provides some certainty over the modernization of Bangladesh’s power 
system. 
 
 
Maximized Renewable Energy Wealth, Energy Efficiency and Storage 
Infrastructure includes . . .  
30% maximal 
variable renewable 
energy by 2030, lower 
energy intensity by 
20% by 2030, subject 
to grid 
An investment 
opportunity of at 
least USD 10 billion 
over the next 
decade in 
generation alone 
Public cost 
savings of at least 
USD 1.7 billion per 
year in fossil fuel 
subsidies by 2030 
Support for 
around 12,000 
jobs by 2025 and 
around 40,000 
jobs by 2030 
 
61 Islam, S. (2021, March 25).  Bangladesh to try again with national clean power policy. PV Magazine. Retrieved 
June 14, 2022, from       https://www.pv-magazine.com/2021/03/25/bangladesh-to-try-again-with-national-clean-
power-policy/ 82 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
modernization, 
financing and 
investment, setting 
the trajectory for low 
carbon growth 
towards 40% 
renewable energy by 
2041. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 83  
 
 
 
 
 
Cost savings from renewables under different scenarios are as follows: 
 
Scenario 
Net Savings per annum 
(BDT Crore) 
Net Savings per annum 
(USD Million) 
2025 2030 2025 2030 
Scenario 1: NDC  913 3,971  108 468 
Scenario 2: BAU 621 2,588  73 305 
Scenario 3: MCPP 1,503 8,121  177 958 
Scenario 4: MCPP-M 1,957 14,593  231 1,721 84 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
It is important to note that the maximum scenario leads to net savings of USD 1.721 
billion per year by 2030. By 2050, savings may reach up to USD 3.7 billion per year.62  
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 We will conduct a feasibility study for Bongoposagor 
Independence Giga Array, one of the first large scale hybrid RE -
adaptation infrastructure projects with an offshore wind mega -
project for domestic energy security and blue economy benefits  
at a large scale.  
MoPEMR 
2022 We will include resilience in least -cost modeling studies for 
integrating variable renewable energy at scale and necessary 
policy support, including maximizing socio -economic outcomes 
and necessary policy support with development partners.  
MoPEMR 
2022 Energy Hubs will carry out a feasibility study for energy efficiency, 
tidal power, hydrogen production and value chain, and ocean 
thermal energy conversion in the Bay of Bengal. 
MoPEMR 
2023 Energy Hubs plan to enable co nversion with recapitalization of 
existing fossil facilities to biomass waste -to-energy plants, and 
advanced hydrogen production centers with support from the 
Hydrogen Energy Laboratory and Sustainable and Renewable 
Energy Development Authority (SREDA), in cluding taking 
advantage of seasonality and connecting hydrogen with 
renewable energy plants, including the upskilling of plant workers, 
and the overall optimization of energy capacity. 
MoPEMR 
2023 We will consult on a storage roadmap and policy development for 
Bangladesh to optimize renewable energy and grid stability 
including with the Bangladesh Rural Electrification Board’s 
Electricity Distribution Modernization Program and development 
partners. 
MoPEMR 
2023 Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array begins installing 500MW 
of offshore wind per year up to 2030 with planting of coastal 
mangroves to build coastal resilience and expand economic 
opportunities around fisheries. 
MoPEMR 
 
62 Teske, S., Morris, T., Nagrath, K (2019). 100% Renewable Energy for Bangladesh – Access to renewable energy for 
all within one generation. Report prepared by ISF for Coastal Development Partnership (CDP Bangladesh; Bread for 
the World, Germany; World Future Council, Germany; June 2019. Institute for Sustainable Futures (ISF) Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 85  
 
2023 We will set up 2,000 MW of renewable energ y procurement on a 
modular basis completed by 2025 with access to low-cost capital 
through public-private partnerships and private power providers. 
MoPEMR 
2024 We will set up storage procurement to be completed in phases 
through 2030 with access to low -cost capital through public -
private partnerships and private power providers. 
MoPEMR 
2025 All railway platforms to include solar power and other public 
spaces to maximize use of solar power  
MoPEMR 
2026 We will set up 5,000 MW of renewable energy procurement on a 
modular basis to be completed by 2030 with access to low -cost 
capital through public -private partnerships and private power 
providers. 
MoPEMR 
2029 We will phase out all import ed fossil fuel subsidies and redirect 
them to lower cost option s, loss and damage, adaptation, 
renewable energy, and storage technology ; while enabling the 
lowest income groups to benefit from financial support and 
subsidized clean energy.  
MoPEMR 
2030 Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array completes installation of 
4 GW of offshore wind generation and parallel planting of 
mangrove greenbelt. 
MoPEMR 
2030 We will set the trajectory for 40% renewable energy by 2041 and 
100% by 2050.   
MoPEMR 
2041 40% renewable energy with support from international resources. MoPEMR 
2050 100% renewable energy with support from international 
resources. 
MoPEMR 
 
 
Maximized renewable energy wealth, energy efficiency and storage are a direct 
investment measure that supports Covid-19 Recovery Interventions63 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience 
Results and Benefits: 
Supports 1.5-degrees goal 
Supports development of 
high-level technology 
Builds long-term resilience 
Covid-19 Recovery Dividend: 
High employment intensity 
Skills development 
High economic multiplier 
Contribution to the productive asset base 
Support for long-term transformation 
 
63 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 86 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Positive environmental and social outcomes  
 
 
SDGs . . .  
SDGs 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDGs 8: Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
SDGs 17: Partnerships 
SDGs 10: Reduced 
Inequalities 
SDGs 13: Climate Action  
 
 
Key Measures 
4GW Bongoposagor Independence Giga Array (offshore wind) with parallel planting of 
a greenbelt of mangroves – the largest hybrid RE-Adaptation project 
Energy Hubs  
Maximized floating solar installations  
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
Credit enhancement to 
ensure gold standard 
financing 
 
International low -cost 
refinancing or 
recapitalization  
 
International support for 
upskilling labor  
Underwriting support via 
PPA 
Industry – capital 
investment and 
industry/consumers as 
purchasers and 
beneficiaries of energy 
generated Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 87  
 
6B. Modernization of the Grid and the Ancillary Market to Support 
Resilience  
 
We will position Bangladesh to pursue accelerated grid technology modernization and 
ancillary market development in order to allow for the power system to take advantage 
of rapid technological improvements to improve cost -competitiveness and socio -
economic outcomes. For electric grids, resilience means not merely a restoration, 
even one with improvements such as greater tolerance of natural hazards. Resilience 
is building into the grid structure the fundamental changes in both the natural and 
human environment, towards a modern grid. The modern grid should reflect not only 
the need of consumers for dependable and affordable power, but also their 
aspirations for a cleaner, healthier, and safer environment.  
 
We will thus enable adequate grid investments, redu ction of broader infrastructure 
risks, protection from spiking fossil fuel prices and reduced pricing 
impacts. Furthermore, the 8FYP recognizes that grid improvements and extensions 
can address overcapacity issues.  
 
Modernization with. . . 
1. High shares of domestic 
renewable energy 
2. Increased installation of 
storage technology 
3. Increased distributed 
energy resources 
Through climate finance investment in . . . 
1. Infrastructure  2. Software (e.g., Advanced 
Distribution Management 
System software 
applications) 
3. Training programs 
include use of grid 
modernization software 
application, s trategies for 
advanced electric 
distribution planning 
methods and tools, with a 
focus on emerging grid 
modernization 
technologies and 
deployment of distrib uted 
energy resources. 
Towards the delivery of . . . 
Flexibility through cost 
reductions associated with 
forecast errors and/or 
reductions in price spikes  
 
Resilience to be able to 
adapt to changing 
conditions such as a set of 
defined hazards 
 
Affordability to not exceed 
customers’ willingness and 
ability to pay 
 
Security to prevent external 
threats and malicious 88 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Flexibility to be able to 
respond to adapt to 
economic variabilities and 
to take advantage of new  
technology  
Reliability to maintain 
delivery of electricity, 
quality of power, and 
reduced interruption of 
distribution  
Sustainability to reduce 
health and environmental 
costs  
attacks including reliance 
on unstable or volatile 
supply 
 
 
A modernized power sector aims  for increased flexibility to integrate market 
opportunities such as a new ancillary services market 64 for ramping products, fast 
frequency response from batteries, as well as for new market participants to provide 
ancillary services such as wind turbines providing inertial response, solar PV and 
utility-scale storage providing voltage support, and distrib uted energy resources 
(DERs) providing frequency and voltage control.  
 
Energy storage systems such as batteries, flywheels, and compressed air energy 
storage are reserve resources that can have an important role in improving the 
stability and reliability of the electricity grid. Traditional power purchase agreements 
rely on the logic of maximizing extraction of good outcomes relative to low -cost 
financing on terms; however, the pricing of worst -case scenarios means the delivery 
of more expensive and volati le power purchase outcomes. The optimization of 
domestic renewable energy through a modernized grid can enable a constellation of 
investment with low-cost financing due to risk mitigation in the planning phase with 
storage and system balancing. In short, r isk mitigation in the front end through the 
planning process may reduce the reliance of credit -impaired off-takers on traditional 
power purchase agreements and instead enable a cost-effective and optimized power 
system that prioritizes affordability, domes tic energy security, flexibility, and 
resilience.  
 
Green hydrogen presents an opportunity to take advantage of domestically sourced 
and low -cost power through direct delivery to manufacturing and transportation 
sectors both domestically and in the region while also improving grid resilience and 
flexibility. Green hydrogen also presents an opportunity to strengthen the grid through 
limiting any surges by matching energy demand, while blending green hydrogen with 
LNG. As Bangladesh has an existing gas networ k, the infrastructure can be 
modernized by setting up hydrogen electrolysis alongside existing domestic gas. 
Hydrogen can be liquefied for long -haul transport or conversion to ammonia, which 
together present opportunities to build a fuel cell industry in B angladesh, substitute 
imported fertilizer, and export surpluses to liquid clean-fuel markets.  
 
64 IRENA (2019). Innovation landscape brief: Innovative ancillary services . International Renewable Energy Agency, 
Abu Dhabi. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 89  
 
The strategic energy hubs in the location of coal plants and gas plants will be 
transformed to green hydrogen plants, waste -to-energy plants, and biomass plants.  
This creates new options around electric vehicles and transportation in urban areas. 
Moreover, the existing nuclear reactors could produce byproduct heat to increase the 
efficiency of hydrogen electrolysis and produce surplus power for hydrogen 
production. As such, green hydrogen presents an opportunity for Bangladesh to 
reduce its exposure to imported gas as existing infrastructure can blend up to 30% 
green hydrogen which enables a transition starting in 2030 to 100% green energy from 
the Bongoposagor Ind ependence Giga Array, plus distributed solar photovoltaic and 
nuclear sources. 
 
Supported by the Energy Hubs to enable conversion via modernization of fossil fuel 
plants, with the upskilling of plant workers, the overall optimization of energy capacity 
can enable the power and transportation infrastructure of a 21st century economy. 
Green energy trade with neighbors will also be fostered, replacing at least 50% of 
power imports with contracts for green energy. It could also enable the new 1000 MW 
of new transmission connectivity with India to include green energy trade as early as 
2025.  
 
In addition to the direct economic benefits of utilizing low -carbon technology in the 
power sector, women and other vulnerable groups will be prioritized with access and 
training to benefit from maximized renewable energy wealth, energy efficiency, and 
storage infrastructure. In rural Bangladesh, women are primary consumers of energy 
at household levels. According to the ccGAP, access to alternative low -carbon 
technology lik e improved cooking solutions and renewable energy -powered lamps 
and pumps could provide an interesting approach for promoting women’s economic 
participation in climate action. Not only are jobs created for women who can be 
engaged in the upkeep and mainten ance of solar -powered lamps or pumps for 
example, but can also translate to less time spent on certain activities.  
 
For example, improved cooking solutions (ICS) presents an opportunity of improving 
health and livelihoods. The Gas Sector Master Plan (2017), Bangladesh, set an 
objective to reach 20 million households with ICS by 2030. The 8th FYP also highlights 
incentivizing the use of biogas through the gas use policy as the alternative of pipeline 
natural gas considering the limited domestic reserve of gas. According to the 
Renewable Energy Policy 2008, biogas has been considered as one of the promising 
Renewable Energy resources for Bangladesh.  
 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL), a government owned non-
banking financial institution, is currently implementing successful clean cooking 
initiatives through two programs - i) Improved Cooking Stoves (ICS) - Increase thermal 
efficiency of cooking stoves from tier 1 to tier 3 as per ISO standards. Each ICS saves 
about 1.5 to fuel wood and reduces 1.12 ton of emissions per year. ii) Domestic biogas 
program - prefabricated fiberglass biodigester technology. IDCO L’s expertise and 
experience may be leveraged for installation of additional 18.2 million ICS and 100,000 
domestic biogas plants by 2030 which will reduce about 60 million tCO2e and million 
tCO2e, respectively in the next 10 years. 90 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022      We will have a moratorium on planned (unbuilt) inflexible power 
plants such as 10 coal plants with capacity of 8.4GW. 
MoPEMR 
2022 We will install bidirectional meters. MoPEMR 
2022 We will begin studying a displacement strategy with partners for 
technologically outdated, expensive, and inflexible generation 
plants (e.g., old coal fired plants and high-speed diesel plants, etc.) 
towards new technology. This also includes co -locating solar 
irrigation pumps in farming areas to replace diesel powered 
irrigation pumps.  
MoPEMR 
2022 We will conduct a feasibility study on the Power Modernization 
Strategy towards competitive markets and optimize effective 
policies and undertake comprehensive analysis to create a 
competitive energy market design and opportunities of the future 
with Power Grid Company of Bangladesh Ltd (PGCB) and partners.  
MoPEMR 
2023 We will conduct a feasibility study on hydrogen for up to 30% 
absorption by existing gas infrastructure.  
MoPEMR 
2023 We will begin implementing infrastructure and software 
modernization and worker upskilling.  
MoPEMR 
2024 We will establish a Management Skill Development Center (MSDC) 
of Excellence under the Power Grid Company of Bangladesh.  
MoPEMR 
2025 We will establish a new ancillary services market through policy 
and improved market management design.  
MoPEMR 
2026 We will update the displacement strategy in partnership with 
partners for technologically outdated, expensive, and inflexible 
generation plants.   
MoPEMR 
2027 We will structure financing with donors and investors on a 
displacement strategy. 
MoPEMR 
2028 We will implement the displacement strategy to match with 
replacement capacity from domestic renewable energy and green 
hydrogen. 
MoPEMR 
2030 Achieve 100% clean cooking solutions by 2030 in -line with 
Bangladesh Country Action Plan's goal for clean cook-stoves      
MoPEMR Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 91  
 
 
 
Modernizing our grid could deliver . . . 
Incremental transmission 
and distribution (T&D) 
investment for fortifying 
grid infrastructure, 
software, and training, 
including advanced 
meters65 to all households, 
delivering investment of 
over USD 3.1 billion by 2030  
Establishing an ancillary 
service market to crowd in 
private sector investment 
of at least USD 250  million 
by 2025 and USD 500 
million by 2030 
Support for around 10,000 
jobs by 2025 and around 
30,000 jobs by 203066 
   
 
 
 
 
65 Est 35.2 million households x Est. USD 70 per smart meter  
66 IEA (2020), Sustainable Recovery, IEA, Paris. Retrieved March 1, 2021, from 
https://www.iea.org/reports/sustainable-recovery/evaluation-of-possible-recovery-measures  
Note: In developed economies, job creation opportunities are as follows: 9.9 jobs per USD 1 million invested in 
storage; 6.8 jobs per USD 1 million invested in solar PV; 5.3 jobs per USD 1 million invested in grid modernization; 
0.9 jobs per USD 1 million invested in wind; and 5.9 jobs per USD 1 million invested in hydrogen production. 92 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Modernizing our grid is a direct investment measure that supports Covid-19 Recovery 
Interventions67 such as . . .  
Addressing climate  
and resilience vulnerabilities 
Building long-term resilience 
Supporting development of            
high-level technology 
Supporting 1.5° C  goal 
Covid-19 Recovery Dividend: 
High employment intensity 
Skills development 
High economic multiplier 
Contribution to the productive asset base 
Support for long-term transformation 
Positive environmental and social outcomes  
 
 
SDGs       
SDG 5: Gender equality SDG7: Clean and affordable 
and energy 
SDG 8: Decent work and 
economic Growth 
SDG 9: Industry, innovation, 
and Infrastructure 
SDG 13: Climate action SDG 17: Partnerships 
 
 
Key Measures 
Establishment of ancillary marketplace for ramping products and fast frequency 
response batteries, among others. 
Incremental transmission and distribution upgrades for fortifying grid infrastructure 
(e.g., substations, transformers, high -voltage lines, medium - or low -voltage lines, 
metering, and associated components. 
Installation of smart software platforms for uti lities, automation components (hard or 
soft), remote monitoring, energy management systems, or other basic distribution 
infrastructure upgrades.  
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
 
67 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resilience and Low -Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 93  
 
Credit guarantees to ensure 
gold standard financing 
Budgetary support for 
Power Grid Company of 
Bangladesh 
Industry – capital 
investment and 
industry/consumers as 
buyers of electricity  
 
 
6C. Transitioning to Transport Solutions of the Future        
 
We will prioritize modern mobility solutions for both urban and rural areas as 
recognized in the 8FYP and NAP for intelligent, efficient, sustainable, safe, and 
regionally balanced transportation and traffic management systems. These would 
include green and electric inland water transportation to complement the Bangladesh 
dredging master plan to unlock 10,000 kilometers of river routes while the collected 
silt and debris can be used to raise low-lying land. In addition, high-speed electric rail, 
and u rban development in climate -smart ways, such as modernization of urban 
mobility through rapid -transit e -buses and e -bikes is also included. Prioritization of 
women-only sections in rapid transit systems can also be included. We will unlock 
fiscal incentives (including tax breaks for electric transportation including inland water 
transportation and vehicles) to improve the project economics of modernized 
technologies, while removing fiscal incentives and increasing tax rates for outdated 
technology, contributing to the establishment of an Energy Efficient Vehicles (EEV) 
hub. The EEV hub can also attract EV production lines including, but not limited to, 
solar-powered car and boat producers. Special tax breaks will be provided for 
domestically owned EVs, and h ydrogen-powered vehicles and other modernized 
transportation. This can include cars, shuttles, baby taxis, and scooters, among 
others. EV -charging infrastructure as part of the Bangladesh Rural Electrification 
Board network can thus be utilized.   
 
As the transportation system in the capital Dhaka relies heavily on road transport, 
other mediums like public transport, walking, bicycling will be promoted to reduce 
congestion. To further capture sustainability gains and improved socio -economic 
outcomes, road i mprovements, storm drainage upgrades, and the establishment of 
green infrastructure including but not limited to footpaths, bike lanes, street trees, and 
urban parks will be part of the modernized mobility solution. The MCPP expands urban 
mobility in 8FYP to the entire country by 2023 and foresees reduction in private 
transport mobility due to establishment of public transport networks like MRTs.  
 
In addition to urban passenger mobility, it is equally important to address congestion 
and the subsequent polluting impact of freight transportation between production and 
consumption centers as well as distribution activities within urban areas. We will 
leverage PPP models to create green distribution networks for freight through the use 
of integrated distribution facilities and electric vehicles to fulfill the freight demands 
of urban areas. The use of rail transportation will be encouraged for long -haul 
movement of goods to reduce dependence on road transport with rail growth 
supporting the Bangladesh Railway 30-year Revised Master Plan (2016-2045) to Cox's 
Bazar, Mongla Port, Tungipara, Barisal, Chattogram Hill Tracts and other parts of the 94 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
country.  Similarly, use of internal waterways for transportation of goods will be 
prioritized to utilize the extensive network of waterways and bring down the logistics 
costs for transportation of freight.  
 
 
Transitioning to Transport Solutions of the Future to...  
Mobilize at least USD 5 
billion of green financing 
from international investors 
Shift at least 30% of the 
newly registered 
transportation fleet to 
electric by 2030 
Build modernized 
industries including 
ridesharing transportation 
industry and 
manufacturing capacity for 
modernized transportation 
 
 
Target Milestones 
Year Target Lead 
Ministry 
2022 We will enable green transportation options to engineer value in 
products by creating an enabling environment for manufacturing 
mobility solutions such as inland water way transportation, green 
electric buses, e -bikes, etc. including tax breaks for electric 
vehicles. 
MoPEMR 
2022 We will conduct feasibility studies and mapping to upgrade 
regional connecting highway corridors inside Bangladesh to 
improve road connectivity with neighboring countries. 
MoRTB 
2023 We will assess the Revised Strategic Transport Plan for Dhaka 
and adjacent cities for the use of modernized technology and 
green financing.   
MoRTB 
2023 We will conduct a feasibility study for electric vehicle adaptation 
in the entire country. 
MoPEMR 
2023 We will accelerate greening and electrification of  inland water 
transportation in coordination with the dredging master plan to 
enhance green logistics and improve navigability of 10,000 
kilometers of river routes. 
MoS 
2024 We will establish an energy efficient vehicles (EEV) manufacturing 
hub through st rategic investments and adaptation of high 
technology for the domestic market and to penetrate regional and 
global markets. 
MoRTB 
2025 We will ensure 50% of the rideshare fleet is green/electric. MoPEMR Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 95  
 
2025 We will enable the climate resilience of the Bangladesh Railway 
30-year revised master plan including protection measures from 
extreme weather, heavy rain, high temperatures, high wind 
speeds, and reduced soil stability. We will also support energy 
efficiency measures of railway inf rastructure including a shift to 
electric. 
MoR 
2030 We will ensure 80% of the rideshare fleet is green/electric. MoPEMR 
2030 We will enable EV manufacturing to contribute up to 10% of GDP 
by 2030. 
MoRTB 
2030 We will ensure 1,500 km of national highways are upgraded to 4/6 
lanes to handle traffic growth. 
MoRTB 
2030 We will ensure the GIS Road Network68 MoRTB 
2030 At least 50% of railway infrastructure is climate -resilient and 
energy efficient.  
MoR 
 
 
Transitioning to Transport Solutions of the Future is a direct investment measure that 
supports COVID-19 Recovery Interventions69 such as . . .  
Climate and Resilience Results and Benefits: 
Addresses vulnerabilities 
Builds long-term resilience 
Supports development of high -level 
technology 
Targets sectors or populations affected by 
non-financial shocks  
Targets disadvantaged groups 
COVID-19 Recovery Dividend: 
Skills development 
High economic multiplier 
Contribution to the productive asset 
base 
Support for long-term transformation 
Positive environmental and social 
outcomes 
 
 
SDG . . .  
SDG 3: Good Health and 
Well-being 
SDG 7: Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, 
and Infrastructure 
 
68 Atlassian. (n.d.). 2.3. Bangladesh Road Network. Logistics Capacity Assessment. Retrieved March 8, 2021, from 
https://dlca.logcluster.org/display/public/DLCA/2.3+Bangladesh+Road+Network 
69 Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2020, October). Accelerating Climate and Disaster Resil ience and Low-Carbon 
Development Through the COVID-19 Recovery: Technical Note. http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TIM189600-2 96 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities 
and Communities 
SDG 12: Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production 
 
 
 
Key Measures 
Electrify 10,000 km of internal waterways transportation in coordination with the 
dredging master plan 
Restore all canals and box culverts 
Construct 10,000 km of bike lanes  
Construct 10,000 km of footpaths 
Electrify transportation including rideshare, e-scooters, e-bikes, and e-baby taxis  
Upgrade 1,500 km of national highways, 4,000 km of regional highways 
Retrofit 13,000 km (approx.) of zilla and upazila (farm to market) roads  
 
 
Resources 
International Partners National Budget Contribution from Private 
Sector 
Support in the creation of 
special leasing facility 
windows and credit 
enhancement  
Commercial subsidy for 
green and electric vehicles 
for transport/logistics 
sector for a period of time 
(e.g., tax exemption) 
Industry capital investment 
and industry 
consumers as users of 
transportation system 
 
Public Private Partnership 
on construction and 
electrification projects Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 97  
 
SECTION 3. OVERSIGHT & IMPLEMENTATION 
AND FINANCING 
 
This section consists of three parts relating to implementation, financing and 
partnerships: 1) Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Oversight & Implementation; 2) 
Financing, 3) Strengthened Economic Partnerships. 
 
Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Oversight & Implementation  
 
The activities under the MCPP will be implemented by the concerned ministries as per 
Government Rules of Business.  
      
The climate-related reporting and assessment of the MCPP will be coordinated and 
overseen by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change as the 
designated agency to ensure sustainable living environment for the present and future 
population of the country through protection of the environment and biodiversity, 
control of environ ment pollution, tackle climate change, development of forest 
resources and sustainable management of maritime resources. 
 
Moreover, research and knowledge management will be led by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change as the leading expert in climate change. In 
order to enable a learning -by-doing approach and to build a culture of research and 
evidence building, there will be special emphasis on technical assistance completion 
reports for technical assistance projects the expected impact, outcome and outputs; 
conduct of activities; evaluation and achievement of the expected outcomes; an 
assessment and rating; major lessons; and recommendations and follow-up actions.      
 
The investment and financing in the MCPP will be coordinated and overseen by the 
Ministry of Finance in coordination with Ministry of Planning and relevant concerned 
ministries, and supported by a special committee which can include representatives 
of each concerned ministry, PPP Authority, the Bangladesh Investment Development 
Authority (BIDA), Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics and CVF/V20 representatives from 
the Government of Bangladesh, while the Prime Minister’s Office can be in charge of 
monitoring the implementation of Mujib Climate Plan activities. Moreover, all relevant 
financing will be coordinated by the Ministry of Finance taking into consideration the 
Climate Fiscal Framework that includes Office of the Controller and Auditor General 
(OCAG), Parliamentary Oversight and social audits from civil society. 
 
Resource mobilization, particularly from external sources and coordination with the 
private sector, will be crucial to the implementation of the MCPP, and the involvement 
of the PMO will play an important role. 98 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
A committee for implementing the MCPP will be responsible for:  
1. Tracking the plan’s implementation and overseeing the review, stocktaking and 
plan cycles, including the baseline and tracking of SDGs  analytics of socio -
economic outcomes to be completed by end of 2022      
2. Enabling the marketing and promotion of economic partnership and 
investment with public and private international, regional, and bilateral partners, 
including through the formation of investment clubs and delegations  
3. Commissioning, developing, and publicizing all analytical studies and 
strategies required for the effective and full delivery of the plan  
4. Creating an online knowledge hub that is accessible to by the public sector, 
private sector, and civil society, inc luding universities and research 
organizations 
5. Collaborating with each relevant ministry and department in the government as 
per the Rules of Business (e.g., Economic Relations Division, Finance Division, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Power, Foreign 
Aided Projects Audit Directorate, etc.). 
 
Equally important is engagement with domestic implementation partners including 
the PPP Authority, Bangladesh Investment Development Authority (BIDA), Bangladesh 
Bureau of Statistics and  CVF/V20 representatives from the Government of 
Bangladesh. The partners can have consultative status and will also include key 
private sector industries represented by the leadership of companies and business 
chambers in Bangladesh in order to complement and reinforce investment and 
partnership.   
 
 
The Financing Outline 
 
The MCPP can seize the opportunity to address the prevailing market failure arising 
from the lack of private sector participation, as well as international public support, 
and investment in modernized, adaptive and resilient infrastructure. Insufficient 
information coupled with a lack of tailored affordable financing has led to 
underinvestment in resilience and adaptation. The introduction of a modernized power 
sector vision for Bangladesh, and the advent of climate and disaster risk financing and 
insurance builds on detecting market opportunity and pricing risk that can enable the 
outcomes of 8FYP, Vision 2041 and BDP 2100. Moreover, with Bangladesh’s LDC 
graduation underway and expected in 2026, the cost of development finance and debt 
servicing may rise, creating a need to leverage private sector capital and diversify 
financing options.  
 
Therefore, green financing is considered to be part of resilience building and CDRFI as 
an element of  national adaptation planning processes that can help to address the 
market failure outlined above. Green finance could also incentivize cost -effective 
investment in adaptation measures (soft and hard engineering), risk retention, risk Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 99  
 
financing instruments such as risk transfer, contingent credit lines and cat-bonds, and 
risk management. Residual risk can be reduced through early -warning systems, 
communication and loss and damage or endowment funds. The building of value 
recognition stemming from pricing r isk can drastically shift the economics of 
operating in our system by adding value to investment in and tools for options that 
offer resilience and price stability such as renewable energy and storage, disaster risk 
reduction, improved climate risk managem ent and contributions to sustainable 
development goals by 2030.  
 
The climate finance and green growth strategy may include, but  is not limited to 
anticipatory and comprehensive climate and disaster risk management to enable 
adaptive capacities. International climate funds and green growth oriented support 
include from multilateral and bilateral sources as well as Climate Investmen t Funds 
(CIF), the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green Climate Fund (GCF). The 
Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund (BCCTF) is a national climate fund that can 
be supplemented through fund matching by international climate funds.   Furthermore, 
there is recognition of the need to withdraw capital from certain inflationary sectors 
such as coal, oil and gas, and therefore requires the development of green and 
adaptation-focused financing structures that can catalyze favorable debt terms, along 
with redirecting fossil fuel subsidies to loss and damage remediation, adaptation, 
renewable energy, storage, and grid modernization. 100 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Figure 8: Climate Physical R isk: Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk 
Reduction Options 
 
Source: Adapted from the World Bank/DRIP 70 World Bank (2011) 71, Munich Climate 
Insurance Initiative (2018)72 
 
 
 
 
70 https://www.scor.com/en/file/25401  
71 Poundrik, S. (2011). Disaster Risk Financing : Case Studies . EAP DRM Knowledge Notes; No. 23. World Bank. © 
World Bank. Retrieved February 17, 2021, from https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/10104 
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. 
Clarke, D.l & Mahu, O. (2011). Risk Layering and Disaster Risk Financing Strategy. Disaster Risk Financing and 
Contingent Credit: A Dynamic Analysis.  https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Risk-layering-and-disaster-risk-
financing-strategy_fig3_228220080  
72  Schäfer, L., Warner, K., Kreft, S. (2018). Exploring a nd Managing Adaptation Frontiers with Climate Risk 
Insurance. In: Mechler, R., Bouwer, L., Schinko, T., Surminski, S., Linnerooth-Bayer, J. (eds) Loss and Damage from 
Climate Change. Climate Risk Management, Policy and Governance. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-72026-5_13 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 101  
 
Table: Climate Funds Architecture 
 
 Grants Loans Risk 
Mitigation 
Instruments 
Equity Average 
Fund 
Approval 
per Project 
Co-
Financi
ng 
Ratio 
Potential 
Implementers 
as indicated by 
the Facility 
Banglade
sh 
Climate 
Change 
Trust 
Fund 
(BCCTF) 
✓    N/A 0 Government 
ministries 
Climate 
Investme
nt Funds 
such as 
Pilot 
Program 
for 
Climate 
Resilienc
e (PPCR) 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ $15.8 
million (for 
PPCR) 
1:1.3 
(for 
PPCR) 
ADB, World 
Bank 
Global 
Environm
ent 
Facility 
(GEF) 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ $6.7 
million 
1:9.7 ADB, FAO, World 
Bank, UNDP, 
UNIDO, UNEP, 
IFAD, IUCN 
Green 
Climate 
Fund 
(GCF) 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ $42.4 
million 
1:2.2 Direct Access: 
IDCOL, PKSF 
 
Indirect Access: 
AFD, ADB, GIZ, 
EIB, FAO, HSBC, 
WB, IFC, IFAD, 
IUCN, JICA, KfW, 
UNDP, UNEP, 
WFP, WMO 102 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan’s estimated level of investment is reflected below.  
 
Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan Est. Investment Size up to 2030 
Per Program Total 
Key Priority Area 1: Accelerated Adaptation  
 
- Green Financing until 2030 including Resilience 
Bonds up to 2041 to Promote Green Growth, 
Accelerated Adaptation and Protective 
Infrastructure in line with 8FYP and Bangladesh 
Delta Plan 2100 
 
 
 
USD 44.190 
billion 
 
 
 
USD 44.1 billion 
Key Priority Area 2: Just Transition of Labor and Future -
Proofing Industry with Technology Transfer 
 
- Just Transition and Modernization through 
Training and Skills Development for Labor Markets 
of the Future   
 
- Future-Proof Bangladesh’s Position in the Global 
Supply Chain 
 
 
 
 
USD 1.51 billion 
 
 
USD 10.12 
billion 
 
 
 
 
USD 11.63 
billion 
Key Priority Area 3: Increasing public revenue to spend on 
the most vulnerable 
 
- Investment in the Realization of Locally Led 
Adaptation Outcomes 
 
- Established Carbon Financing Regime for Revenue 
Generation 
 
 
 
USD 3.89 billion 
 
 
USD 25.13 
million 
 
 
 
USD 3.92 billion 
Key Priority Area 4: Comprehensive Climate and Disaster 
Risk Financing and Management 
 
- Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Financial 
Protection and Productivity Enhancement 
 
- Development of Climate -Resilient and Nature -
Based Agricultural and Fisheries Supply and Value 
Chains including National Disaster Risk Financing 
and Management to Safeguard Food Security, 
Nutrition and Water Security 
 
 
 
USD 2.87 billion 
 
 
USD 2.02 billion 
 
  
 
 
 
 
USD 4.89 billion 
 
 
Key Priority Area 5: Leveraging 21st-century technologies 
for well-being 
 
- Resilient Well-Being Programs 
 
 
 
 
USD 150.75 
million 
 
 
 
USD 4.55 billion Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 103  
 
 
- Accelerated Digital Revolution 
 
USD 4.40 billion  
Key Priority Area 6: Maximized Renewable Energy, Energy 
Efficiency and Power & Transportation Sector Resilience 
 
- Maximized Renewable Energy Wealth, Energy 
Efficiency and Energy Storage Infrastructure 
 
- Modernization of the Grid and the Ancillary Market 
to Support Resilience  
 
- Transitioning to Transport Solutions of the Future 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USD 13.55 
billion 
 
USD 3.18 billion 
 
USD 3.90 billion 
 
 
 
 
 
USD 20.63 
billion 
Total USD 89.72 billion 
 
 
The resource breakdown of the MCPP is as follows:  
 
Figure 9. Investment Allocation 
 
 
 
 
Below is an overview of the breakdown in investment including guarantees for private 
sector, international partner support through grants, private sector participation 
(international and domestic) and government expenditure, which is based on existing 
planned government spending. 
 
 
52.30% Adaptation USD 46.93 
billion
28.60% Resilience USD 25.64 
billion
2.22% Loss and 
Damage
USD 2 
billion
16.88% Low-Carbon 
Co-Benefits
USD 15.15 
billion 104 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 105  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The initial typology of projects and financing73 is as follows: 
 
Type Project 
Name 
Project 
Details 
Key 
Responsi
ble Entity Financi
ng 
Estimat
ed 
Investm
ent 
Govt  Pvt Conces
sional 
or de -
risking 
tool or 
grant 
Resilien
ce/ 
Adaptat
ion 
Compre
hensive 
Climate 
and 
Disaster 
Risk 
Manage
ment 
and 
Financi
ng 
Strateg
y  
Financi
al 
protecti
on 
instrum
ents 
MOF, 
MoDMR, 
MOEFCC, 
MoWR 
Risk 
and 
opportu
nity 
sharing 
and 
invest
ment 
within 
membe
rs of 
the 
InsuRe
silience 
Global 
Partner
ship 
USD 1 
billion 
40% 20% 40% 
 
73 Financing scenarios have been developed based on realistic scenarios of available international public finance 
as it would be expected to grow in future, and also the borrowing capacity of the government within its agr eed 
fiscal constraints. Most of the public debt relates to large-scale projects derived from earlier plans that the MCPP      
has incorporated, notably Delta 2100. The plan aims to leverage USD 13.84 billion in international public funds. 106 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Transpo
rt 
Electrify
ing 
Transpo
rtation 
E-Bikes, 
E-Buses 
in 
Dhaka 
  State-
Owned 
Green 
SPV 
Build 
Operate 
Transfe
r 
USD 1 
billion 
30% 40% 20% 
Resilien
ce/ 
Adaptat
ion 
Delta 
2100 
Phase 1 
Coastal 
zones 
(USD 11 
billion), 
Barind & 
drought
-prone 
(USD 2 
billion), 
haor & 
flash 
flood 
(USD 
350 
million), 
Chattog
ram Hill 
Tracts      
(USD 
750 
million), 
river 
system 
& 
estuarie
s (USD 
6 
billion), 
and 
urban 
areas 
(USD 8 
billion), 
among 
others. 
 Resilien
ce 
project 
bonds 
(both 
public 
and 
private 
sector) 
leveragi
ng low -
cost 
internat
ional 
financi
ng 
source
s 
Over 
USD 35 
billion in 
investm
ent 
mobiliz
ed by 
2030 
20% 55% 10% 
Adaptat
ion 
Locally 
led 
adaptati
on 
To be 
determi
ned 
Lead - 
Local 
Governm
ent 
Division, 
Grant 
financi
ng with 
internat
ional 
USD 
1billion 
per year 
by 2030 
55% 5% 45% Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 107  
 
MoEFCC, 
MoDMR, 
MoWCA, 
MOA, 
MoWR 
and 
regiona
l  
Resilien
ce/Ren
ewable 
Energy 
Bongop
osagor 
Indepen
dence 
Giga 
Array 
(offshor
e wind – 
one of 
the first 
large 
scale 
hybrid 
RE-
adaptati
on 
infrastr
ucture 
projects
) 
500GW 
per year 
from 
2023 to 
2029, 
1GW in 
2030 
and 
4GW 
installe
d 
capacit
y by 
2030 
MPEMR State-
Owned 
Green 
SPV as 
off-
taker 
with 
PPA 
Build 
Operate 
Transfe
r 
USD 7.2 
billion 
20% 75% 5% 
Energy 
Efficien
cy and 
Renewa
ble 
Energy 
Energy 
efficien
cy and 
renewa
ble 
Energy 
(includi
ng 
floating 
solar 
and 
rooftop 
solar) 
for 
househ
olds, 
manufa
cturing, 
and 
industry 
 
At least 
1GW by 
2025 
 
At least 
to 2GW 
by 2030 
MPEMR Lease 
financi
ng with 
conces
sional 
grant to 
reduce 
cost of 
capital 
for 
industr
y and 
househ
olds 
USD 2 
billion 
30% 20% 40% 108 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
To ensure that finance can be effectively accessed, mobilized, and scaled up to 
contribute to achieving climate prosperity, our strategy includes creating pools of 
funds with credit enhancement to encourage programmatic investment, rather than 
project-level investment.  
 
Given the catalytic role they can play in supporting both better public and private 
investment and in scaling up and reducing the cost of finance, we aim to strengthen 
state-owned institutions as we recognize the need to embark on the Mujib vision of a 
climate-resilient and low -carbon future to capture all possible socio -economic and 
financial benefits.  
 
Optimized green financing structures to attract foreign direct investment and mobilize 
domestic private sector capital include but are not limited to the following:  
 
● Prioritizing the use of public -private partnerships (PPP) as a key solution to 
climate investment in coordination with the PPP Authority as it may enable 
access to bonds or syndicated loans.     
 
● Incentivizing investment in low -carbon and climate -resilient infrastructure 
including preferential refinancing rates, project -level and portfolio -level green 
assessments to support investors seeking such asset classes and risk -
adjusted capital requirements for non -low-carbon and non -climate-resilient 
projects   
 
● Creating special-purpose vehicles (SPV) or partnerships for climate r esilience, 
for example, joint ventures or partnerships with state owned enterprises. 
 
● Adopting alternative financing tools such as a special leasing facility windows. 
Modernized technology requires sizable capital expenditure and by changing 
the financing from a capital-expense model into an operating -expense model, 
and by matching expected revenue or savings with lease payments, it would 
greatly improve the affordability of modernization. 
 
● Introducing measures that include the issuance of green financing t ools up to 
2030 and resilience bonds up to 2041 to make additional credit available for 
public and private sector actors that target triple -dividend investments. Such 
stimulus spending will have long-term impacts, especially when used for major 
infrastructure, or to support selected technologies and even in particular social 
protection programs. Choices made quickly without considering the wider 
range of risks facing Bangladesh and especially the now -inevitable effects of 
climate change could lock countries  into high carbon and vulnerable options, 
closing off more resilient pathways. There is also the risk that misguided 
allocation of stimulus and recovery spending could lead to stranded assets, 
vulnerable populations, and irreversible damage to natural asse ts such as the 
healthy ecosystems and watersheds upon which the livelihoods of so many 
ultimately depend on. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 109  
 
● Enabling the Bangladesh Bank to use a variety of tools to incentivize 
investment in adaptation and resilient low -carbon infrastructure, including 
preferential refinancing rates, differentiated capital requirements such as a 
“fossil fuel penalizing factor”, and setting higher capital requirements for non -
low-carbon and non-climate-resilient projects. 
 
● Mobilizing state-owned enterprises, including banks and others, to play a risk -
reduction role by deploying a range of business models and utilizing a range of 
instruments to reduce the cost of financing. A well -regarded state -owned 
enterprise, for example, can mobilize the volume of finance needed, bringi ng 
down the cost of capital and managing risk. There is a clear need for de-risking 
instruments and enabling flows into new green and resilient sectors and asset 
classes that could unlock significant investment. 
 
● Creating a dedicated green capital markets platform to increase uptake and 
use of various relevant green financing such as resilience bonds, green bonds, 
climate bonds, and sovereign blue bonds that will help increase finance for 
resilient recovery packages. A green bond is focused on assets with p ositive 
and quantifiable environmental impacts. A blue bond also has green finance 
eligibility but is focused on marine conservation. A sustainability bond is debt 
security with environmental and social impacts. A social bond on the other 
hand raises funds  for new and refinancing projects with positive social 
outcomes. A transition bond is a new class of debt security that can finance 
brown energy’s transformation to green and to catalyze resilience building. A 
dedicated green capital markets platform would  reduce information 
asymmetry by improving and standardizing metrics for the classification of 
assets.  
 
● Blended finance, such as V20 -initiated initiatives, can be used as catalytic 
capital from philanthropic or public sources to increase private sector fu nding 
for high impact projects. Blended finance aims to de -risk loans for greenfield 
projects that will not proceed in the absence of concessional financing. It 
enhances asset credit value as it reduces uncertainty and costs in terms or risk-
return expecta tions. For example, utilizing the V20’s Accelerated Financing 
Mechanism for the targeted use of credit strengthening for national banks can 
enable the financing of adaptation and resilience projects. This could include 
partial credit guarantees or insurance and risk sharing, including subordinated 
debt investment, thus lowering the cost of capital.  
 
● Export Credit Agencies in developed countries can reinforce the cooperative 
relationship among financial institutions and government agencies through 
financial support for resilient infrastructure projects. In support of this, the 
central bank (Bangladesh Bank), for example, can craft enabling regulations in 
terms of hard currency being advanced by ECAs to local commercial banks to 
ensure borrowing is affordable and accessible for projects. 110 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
● Adopting the risk -layering approach in the Climate and Disaster Risk 
Management and Financing Strategy to build resilience, we will link planned 
adaptation with CDRFI instruments and thus utilize the most cost -effective 
reduction in exposure to climate risks that will integrate investments in risk 
reduction (adaptation), risk retention (e.g., budgetary allocations for 
contingency funds for low-impact, high-frequency events), risk transfer on and 
across different level s (e.g., for high -impact, low(er) frequency events) and 
contingency financing.  
 
 
 
Economic Partnerships Strengthened 
 
A large part of economic partnership strengthening will come in the form of 
investment and trade with climate considerations by North –South, South –South, 
regional and international cooperation. Private domestic and foreign investment can 
be boosted by impr oving the investment landscape with a view to reducing the cost 
of doing business and providing access to serviced land through special economic 
zones. The MCPP aims to increase domestic private investment and foreign direct 
investment. Strengthening econo mic partnerships is to be supported through 
marketing campaigns, publicizing projects, and hosting annual investor conferences 
with a range of capital providers, international institutions, and bilateral partners. 
  
The Climate Prosperity Plans will drive climate resilience, adaptation, and low carbon 
development demand from investors (bilateral, multilateral, and commercial). These 
plans can serve as a negotiating tool to enable a climate trade that leads to robust 
competition with partners including stren gthened economic partnerships with 
countries aligned with safeguarding the 1.5 ᴼC limit of the Paris Agreement . 
Concurrently, there will be a reduction in the volume of trade with countries that are 
not aligned with climate prosperity outcomes as a result o f reduced fossil fuel 
imports. 
 
There is significant opportunity for technology -transfer partnerships and building 
manufacturing capacity in Bangladesh. Partnerships in adaptation technology may be 
pursued in areas such as flood safeguards, weather forecas ting technologies, 
insurance tools, more resilient crops, water recycling, water purification, efficient 
irrigation systems, and sensors especially for flood zones. Moreover, partnerships 
with the EU, Japan, the US, and Korea can be leveraged to pursue gre en hydrogen. 
India could be a valuable partner in solar power and electric vehicles. China can be 
leveraged for a modernized power grid and other resilient and quality infrastructure, 
alongside Japan and the EU. Partnerships can also be leveraged for green  supply 
chains and value-engineering in agriculture, fisheries, and manufacturing with the US, 
EU, China, Southeast Asia, and others.  
 
The regional partnerships in South Asia (including through the South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation) feature connectivity with neighboring countries Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 111  
 
that can strengthen value -chain/supply-chain integration. Moreover, the South Asia 
region can secure regional energy security through least -cost options that are 
competitive enough to attract global manufacturing, a griculture, fisheries, and 
services. In addition, there is an opportunity to explore foreign direct investment by 
Bangladesh in member CVF/V20 countries to earn foreign currency overseas. 
 
Given the heightened risk of spillover effects that could cause countries and industries 
to perform below their potential, it is imperative for economic partners to coordinate 
stimulus efforts to build a low-carbon and climate-resilient global supply chain.  
 
Moreover, multilateral development banks can improve capacity -building efforts, 
including the creation of project -preparation tools to support speedier project cycles 
and implementation. Additional support for knowledge sharing between countries will 
also increase the capacity for modernization and climate adaptation. 112 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Glossary 
 
Terminology Definition 
1.5ᴼ C limit Official survival limit of temperature rise under the Paris Agreement 
beyond which climate -induced risks and disasters will be far more 
severe. 
Adaptation  Adaptation refers to adjustments to ecological, social and economic 
systems in such a manner as to build resilience of human communities 
and natural ecosystems so as to moderate or minimize potential 
damage or to benefit from opportunities associated with climate 
change. 
Adaptation Fund (AF)  Fund established in 2001 under the Kyoto Protocol to finance the 
projects and programmes in developing countries that are vulnerable 
to the adverse impacts of climate change.  
Adaptive Social 
Protection (ASP) 
An appr oach to reduce negative impacts of global challenges and 
change, such as poverty, food insecurity and climate change, as well as 
their increased interaction with natural hazards, such as floods, 
hurricanes or earthquakes. ASP involves combining social prot ection, 
disaster risk management and climate change adaptation 
Grid modernization Improvements needed in the power grid to accommodate new 
technology  
Agro-meteorological 
services 
Services concerned with interactions between meteorological and 
hydrological and agricultural factors. 
Adaptation tracking 
mechanism  
Mechanism that involves monitoring and quantifying complex 
processes of change that take place at the intersection of socio -
economic, natural and political systems, and across multiple scales. 
Capital intensity Capital intensity is the infusion of high amounts of capital in a business 
or production process. It therefore requires a higher proportion of fixed 
assets (land, property, plant, and equipment) to produce goods and 
services. Industries or companies that require such large capital 
investments are known as capital intensive businesses. 
Carbon assets 
 
Physical and natural assets with direct or indirect exposure to GHG 
emission constraints, including first, soil, ocean carbon etc. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 113  
 
Carbon finance  Carbon finance is a mechanism adopted by OECD countries to provide 
money for GHG )carbon) emission reduction projects in the developing 
countries  
Climate finance  Climate finance is the flow of funds from developed countries to 
developing countries to address the issues related to climate change. 
It refers to local, national or transnational financing, primarily provided 
by developed countries, which may be drawn fr om public, private and 
alternative sources and mobilized to help developing countries 
mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change.  
Climate funds  Climate funds are resources earmarked at multilateral, bilateral and/or 
national levels for measures  that address climate change. Several 
climate change dedicated funds such as GCF, Least Development 
Countries Fund (LDCF), Adaptation Fund, and Climate Investment 
Funds have been established to support the poor and vulnerable 
developing countries  
Climate Investment 
Funds 
The Climate Investment Funds (CIFs) is a multi -donor trust fund 
established by developed countries to provide developing and middle -
income countries with urgently needed resources to manage the 
challenges of climate change and reduce their greenhouse gas 
emissions. The World Bank acts as a trustee of this fund. CIF consists 
of two distinct funds: the Clean Technology Fund and the Strategic 
Climate Fund. Currently, Nepal is implementing projects such as the 
Pilot Project for Climate Resilience, Scaling up Re newable Energy 
Programme and Forest Investment Programme under the Strategic 
Climate Fund.  
Carbon sink  A carbon sink is any reservoir, natural or otherwise, that accumulates 
and stores some carbon -containing chemical compound for an 
indefinite period an d thereby lowers the concentration of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. 
Carbon tax  It is the tax levied on fossil fuels, especially those used by motor 
vehicles, intending to reduce the emission of carbon dioxide and for 
prompting a switch to clean energy  
Carbon trading  Carbon trading is a market -based system aimed at reducing 
greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming, particularly 
carbon dioxide emitted by burning fossil fuels and to add benefits for 
carbon sinks including forest carbon, blue carbon and soil carbon . 114 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Catastrophe bonds 
 
High-yield debt instrument that is designed to raise money for 
governments and private sector in the insurance industry in the event 
of a natural disaster. 
Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM) 
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) is a mechanism under the 
Kyoto Protocol through which developed countries may finance 
projects on reduction or removal of greenhouse gas emissions in 
developing countries,  and, in return, receive carbon credits for doing so 
which they may apply to meeting mandatory limits on their own 
emissions.   
Climate displacement 
 
Mass migration of populations affected by climate change forcibly 
leaving their homes that have become uninhabitable 
Climate equity 
 
Protection from environmental hazards as well as access to 
environmental benefits for all, regardless of income, race, and other 
characteristics. 
Climate finance Local, national or transnational financing —drawn from public, private 
and alternative sources of financing—that seeks to support mitigation 
and adaptation actions that will address climate change 
Climate Prosperity Climate Prosperity aims to counteract the threat multip lier of climate 
change towards maximized socio -economic outcomes through 
transforming the real economy with technology transfer,  new 
resources and economic partnerships. 
Climate Resilience The ability to anticipate, prepare for, and respond to hazardous events, 
trends, or disturbances related to climate 
Climate smart design With good spatial information, decision makers can plan for resilience 
to climate change. 
Climate variability Climatic parameter of a region varying from its long-term mean. 
Climate Vulnerability 
Monitor 
 
A CVM flagship report with new tools to assess global vulnerability to 
various effects of climate change within different nations. The 2nd 
edition of the report has underpinned the Paris Agreement survival limit 
of 1.5ᴼ C. 
Compound interest 
rates 
This is calculated by multiplying the initial principal amount by one plus 
the annual interest rate raised to the number of compound periods 
minus one. Interest can be compounded on any given frequency 
schedule, from continuous to daily to annually. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 115  
 
Climate disaster risk 
financing and insurance 
This refers to a set of tools available to financially manage the impacts 
of increasing risk exposure due to climate change, including but not 
limited to pre-arranged financing and insurance solutions.  
Co-financing The joint or parallel financing of programs or projects. . Contributions 
may come from a range of actors including mul financial resource 
providers include bilateral funds, multilateral institutions, international 
climate funds, g overnment or government -affiliated institutions, and 
private sector, among others.  
Concessional loan These are loans that are extended on terms substantially more 
generous than market loans. The concessionality is achieved either 
through interest rates below those available on the market or by grace 
periods, or a combination of these. Concessional loans t ypically have 
long grace periods. 
Contingency 
fund/financing 
Reserve of money set aside to cover possible unforeseen future 
expenses (e.g. climate-induced loss and damage) 
Contingent Credit Lines Contingent credit is one type of financial instrument to h elp 
governments secure funds in advance of a disaster 
Cost of capital Cost of capital considers the costs of financing —like loan interest or 
the minimum return investors expect to earn on the project.. 
 
Credit strengthening Strategy for improving the credit risk profile of a business or 
government, usually to obtain better terms for repaying debt. 
Current account 
balance 
 
Measures the nation's earnings and spendings abroad and it consists 
of the balance of trade 
Debt sustainability 
 
A country's public debt is considered sustainable if the government is 
able to meet all its current and future payment obligations without 
exceptional financial assistance or going into default. 
Deflationary price 
 
Deflation is when the general price levels in a country are falling —as 
opposed to inflation when prices rise 
Demographic dividend 
 
Accelerated economic growth that may result from a decline in a 
country's birth and death rates and the subsequent change in  the age 
structure of the population. 116 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Direct Access  A mechanism in which national accredited entities of developing 
countries gain direct access to GCF funds to implement the selected 
projects and/or programmes. These entities may wish to choose other 
executing entities to carry out the work. 
Disaster risk The potential disaster losses of sudden or slow -onset events in lives, 
health, livelihoods, assets, and services, which could be incurred by a 
particular community or society over some specified future time 
period. Disaster risk is a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability, and 
capacity. 
Disaster risk reduction  The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic 
efforts to analyze and manage the causal factors of disasters, 
including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vul nerability 
of people and property, wise management of land and the environment, 
and improved preparedness for adverse events.  
Disaster risk financing  
 
This refers to a set of tools available to financially manage the impacts 
of natural disasters. 
Energy independence 
 
The ability of a country or region to meet all its energy needs without 
having to import primary or final energy. 
Energy security Uninterrupted availability of energy sources at an affordable price 
Export competitiveness Ability of a country/state/region to export more in value added terms 
than it imports when including for “terms of trade” to reflect all 
government “discounts” and import barriers. 
Financial inclusion 
 
Financial inclusion refers to efforts to make financi al products and 
services accessible and affordable to all individuals and businesses, 
regardless of their personal net worth or company size. Financial 
inclusion strives to remove the barriers that exclude people from 
participating in the financial sector and using these services to improve 
their lives. It is also called inclusive finance. 
Financial instruments Financial instruments are monetary assets such as grants, 
concessional loans, guarantees and equity investments.  
Financial protection 
 
In the context of disaster risks, the level of payment to be expected 
based on the occurrence of a disaster event and/or the specific costs 
incurred as a result of a disaster event (for example, property insurance 
contract, parametric insurance contract, c atastrophe bond, 
government compensation or financial assistance for disaster losses). Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 117  
 
Fiscal sustainability The ability of a government to maintain public finances at a credible 
and serviceable position over the long term 
Foreign Direct 
Investment 
An investment in the form of a controlling ownership in a business in 
one country by an entity based in another country 
Future proofing  Future-proofing is the process of anticipating the future and developing 
methods of minimizing the effects of shocks and stresses of future 
events or future trends 
Insuresilience Global 
Partnership 
 
AG20 and V20 Partnership that aims to protect 500 million poor and 
vulnerable people to ensure more timely and reliable post -disaster 
response and to better prepare for climate and disaster risk through the 
use of climate and disaster risk finance and insu rance solutions, 
increasing local adaptive capacity and strengthening local resilience. 
Green energy Green energy is any energy type that is generated from natural sources, 
such as sunlight, wind or water.  
Greenhouse Gas Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, 
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at 
specific wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation 
emitted by the Earth's surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. 
This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O), 
carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane ( CH4) and ozone 
(O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. 
Moreover, there are a number of entirely human -made greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine - 
and bromine -containing substances, dealt wit h under the Montreal 
Protocol. Beside CO2, N2O and CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the 
greenhouse gases sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). 
Green hydrogen Hydrogen produced by splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen using 
renewable energy sources.   
Green supply chain Operational management method and optimization approach to reduce 
the environmental impact along the life cycle of the green product, from 
the raw material to the end product. 
Green export There is no internationally agreed definition of a green sectors a nd 
products. However, it is generally agreed that environmental goods and 
services generally fall into one of two categories: 
1. Goods and services used to provide an environmental service such 
as wastewater treatment, solid waste management, and air pollu tion 
control. Related goods include a wide variety of industrial products 118 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
such as valves, pumps, compressors, etc. that can be specifically 
employed for environmental purposes. 
2. Goods and services whose production, end-use and/or disposal have 
reduced ne gative, or potentially positive, environmental impacts 
relative to a traditional substitute good providing similar function and 
utility. This category includes goods that are generally used for 
purposes other than environmental ones. For example, related g oods 
may include items such as chlorine -free paper, renewable energy 
technologies, energy -efficient office machines, organic soaps, or 
natural fibre packaging or floor covering materials. Such goods, 
sometimes referred to as environmentally preferable products (EPPs), 
have inherently environmentally superior qualities compared to 
substitute goods. Related services include ecotourism services or 
renewable energy transport and electricity supply services.  
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) 
A  fund established within the framework of the UNFCCC as an 
operating entity of the Financial Mechanism to assist developing 
countries in adaptation and mitigation practices to counter climate 
change. At present, USD 10.3 billion has been pledged to this fund. 
Grant  Grant is a type of financial instrument to address climate adaptation 
and/or mitigation project/programme in the developing countries with 
no expectation of a return payment. 
Internal migration 
 
Internal migration is the movement of people from one defined area to 
another within a country 
Just transition 
 
Greening the economy in a way that is as fair and inclusive as possible 
to everyone concerned, creating decent work opportunities and leaving 
no one behind. 
Kampala Principles Principles to enhance the effectiveness of development partnerships 
with the private sector at the country level. 
Liquidity needs 
 
Amount of readily accessible resources is needed to cover regular 
investment, expenses, upcoming purchases, and/or emergency 
spending. 
Leverage  Leverage is used in the context of climate finance in which it refers to 
public finance (e.g. from international finance institutions) that is used 
to encourage private investors to back the same project. This can be in 
the form of equity, loans, risk guarantees or insurance. This is also 
intended to reduce t he perceived risk for the private sector. Financial 
institutions apply the terminology ‘leveraging’ to understand how their 
core contributions (for example, money provided by donor Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 119  
 
governments to a multilateral development bank) can be invested in 
capital markets to create an internal multiplier effect.  
Locally led adaptation 
 
Locally led adaptation action involves shifting power to local 
stakeholders to lead or meaningfully participate in adaptation actions. 
Loss and damage  Harms caused by anthropogenic climate change. Defined 
economically, it is the difference between the adapted (using both 
country-level and expected resources from financial partners) sectoral 
and macroeconomic outputs and the initial baseline without climate 
change. 
Low carbon  Low Carbon or Low Carbon Development means reduction of carbon 
emission to minimal level to mitigate greenhouse gases responsible 
for global warming and climate change. The concept of low carbon 
development was first discussed in UNFCCC, Rio in 1992. Low carbon 
development is generally expressed with the term Low Emission 
Development Strategies (LEDS) or Low Carbon Development Strategies 
(LCDS). 
Low carbon economy An economy based on low-carbon technologies (including in power, 
transport, and industry) and energy sources that produce low levels of 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
Long Term Strategies 
(LTS) 
Long-term Strategies (LTS) invite countries to communicate, by 2020, 
their vision for achieving a low-emission, sustainable economy. These 
mid-century strategies were first called into action by the Paris 
Agreement.  
Mitigation  Efforts to reduce or prevent emission of greenhouse gases. Mitigation 
can mean using new technologies and renewable energies, making 
older equipment more energy effi cient, or changing management 
practices, consumer behavior,, improving the insulation of buildings, 
and expanding forests and other 'sinks' to remove greater amounts of 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.  
National Adaptation 
Plan (NAP) 
National Adaptatio n Plan (NAP) is a continuous, progressive and 
iterative process undertaken by developing country parties to the 
UNFCCC to identify medium and long -term adaptation needs. It also 
includes developing and implementing strategies and programmes to 
address those needs. Nepal is currently in the process of preparing its 
NAP building on the experience of the National Adaptation Programme 
of Action. 
Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) is a term used under the 
UNFCCC referring to actions designed to combat climate change, 120 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
especially for reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by all the 
countries that are party to the UNFCCC. NDCs are the basis of the post-
2020 global emissions reduction commitment. Before the Paris 
Agreement came into force Nationally Determined Contributions were 
called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC). Many 
developing countries have also included other actions related to 
adaptation, technology and finance in their NDCs.  
Natural resource 
management 
 
Management of natural resources such as land, water, soil, plants and 
animals, with a particular focus on how management affects the quality 
of life for both present and future generations. 
Nature-based solutions 
(NbS)  
Nature-based solutions (NbS)) refers to the sustainable management 
and use of natural features and processes to tackle socio -
environmental challenges. These challenges include issues such as 
climate change, water security, water pollution, food security, human 
health, biodiversity loss, and disaster risk management. 
Ocean acidification 
 
A reduction in the pH of the ocean over an extended period of time, 
caused primarily by uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the 
atmosphere. 
Offshore wind 
 
Generation of electricity through wind farms in bodies of water, usually 
at sea. 
Paris Agreement  The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on climate 
change. It was adopted by 196 Parties at COP 21 in Paris, on 12 
December 2015 and entered into force on 4 November 2016. 
Its goal is to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 
degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels. 
To achieve this long -term temperature goal , countries aim to reach 
global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible to 
achieve a climate neutral world by mid-century. 
The Paris Agreement is a landmark in the multilateral climate change 
process because, for the first time, a binding a greement brings all 
nations into a common cause to undertake ambitious efforts to combat 
climate change and adapt to its effects. 
Planetary emergency Planet faces a series of converging crises, all on the same timeline - 
global warming, disasters, extreme  weather events, biodiversity loss, 
acidification of oceans, water stress, food insecurity, planetary 
overshoot, etc. Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 121  
 
Premium subsidies  Any form of financial support or provision of concessional finance 
(inclusive of grant finance) to reduce price of insurancet 
Public-private 
partnerships 
Public-private partnerships involve collaboration between a 
government agency and a private-sector company that can be used to 
finance, build, and operate projects, such as public transportation 
networks, parks, and convention centers. 
Price volatility 
 
Price fluctuations of a commodity. Volatility is measured by the day-to-
day percentage difference in the price of the commodity. 
Private Sector Facility 
(PSF) 
Private Sector Facility (PSF) is a mechanism in which the GCF can 
directly provide grants, concessional loans, risk guarantees or other 
forms of financial products (e.g. green bonds, refinancing, credit lines, 
equity financing) to accredited private companies or pass them on to 
such companies by accredited intermediaries. It is one of the windows 
under the GCF to encourage private sector role and investment in 
climate actions. 
Reskilling  Reskilling is the process of learning new skills so you can do a different 
job, or of training people to do a different job. 
Resilience The ability of a system, community, or society exposed to hazards to 
resist, absorb, accommodate to,  and recover from the effects of a 
hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the 
preservation and restoration of its essential basic structures and 
functions. The resilience of a community in respect to potential hazard 
events is determine d by the degree to which the community has the 
necessary resources and is capable of organizing itself both before and 
during times of need. 
Resilience Bonds Resilience bonds are bonds that are at the intersection of social bonds 
and sustainability bonds. 
Risk management Process of identifying, assessing and controlling threats to an 
organization's capital and earnings. 
Risk retention An individual or organization's decision to take responsibility for a 
particular risk it faces.  
Risk transfer A risk management and control strategy that involves the contractual 
shifting of a pure risk from one party to another.  
Rural electrification Ensuring electrical power in remote and hard-to-reach rural areas. 122 | Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 
 
Salinity intrusion 
 
The movement of saline water into freshwater aquifers, which can lead 
to groundwater quality degradation, including drinking water sources, 
and other consequences.  
Sea level rise An increase in the level of the world's oceans due to the effects of 
global warming. 
Solar photovoltaic cell  A solar cell, or photovoltaic cell, is an electrical device that converts the 
energy of light directly into electricity by the photovoltaic effect, which 
is a physical and chemical phenomenon.  
Soft and hard 
engineering 
A hard engineering approach involves building structures, such as 
groynes, sea walls or rock armour, to protect the coastal area. A soft 
engineering approach works with natural processes. 
Subordinated debt 
investments 
An unsecured loan or bond  that ranks below other, more senior loans 
or securities with respect to claims on assets or earnings. 
Supply chain integration 
 
Information and communication systems of all stakeholders are able 
to seamlessly exchange information through all planning, execution 
and completion of transport and logistics operations throughout a 
product's lifetime.  
Technology transfer Technology transfer is the process of transferring (disseminating) 
technology from the party that owns or holds it to another, in an attempt 
to transform inventions and scientific outcomes into new products and 
services that benefit society.  
Transformation  Transformation refers to a change in the fundamental attributes of a 
system tha t are revolutionary and large scale. This type of changes 
cross the threshold and creates discontinuity in the system through 
adoption of new policies, measures, institutional constructs and 
activities. This change is a part of the ongoing decision -making 
process, which helps to improve the adaptation and mitigation actions.  
Transition Bonds Transition bonds are a relatively new class of debt instrument used to 
fund transition towards reduced environmental impact or lower carbon 
emissions. 
Trade Balance Difference between the value of the goods that a country (or another 
geographic or economic area such as the European Union (EU) or the 
euro area) exports and the value of the goods that it imports.  
Trade Deficit A trade deficit occurs when the v alue of a country's imports exceeds 
the value of its exports —with imports and exports referring both to 
goods, or physical products, and services. In simple terms, a trade Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041 | 123  
 
deficit means a country is buying more goods and services than it is 
selling. 
Upskilling  Upskilling is the process of learning new skills or of teaching workers 
new skills. 
United Nations 
Framework Convention 
on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
is a framework for international cooperation to combat climate change. 
It aims to stabilize the greenhouse gas concentration in the 
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. It focuses on both mitigation and 
adaptation measures. There are now 197 parties to the Convention that 
was adopted at the Earth Summit in 199.  
Voluntary Carbon 
Market (VCM) 
The voluntary carbon market (VCM) was formed with the aim of driving 
finance to activities that reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  Table of Contents 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
Base Year and Future Emission Scenario .................................................................................. 2 
Mitigation Action ................................................................................................................................ 6 
Achievements and Initiatives ...................................................................................................... 15 
Adaptation Action ............................................................................................................................ 18 
Implementation Mechanism ........................................................................................................ 22 
Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of  
Bangladesh’s NDC ............................................................................................................................. 26  1 
Introduction 
The Paris Agreement (P A) was adopted by COP21 in 2015, and subsequently signed and ratified by 
191 Parties. The sole aim is to change  the current course towards combating climate change , 
harboring sustainable development pathway by limiting global warming within 1.5 - 2 degrees  
Celsius above pre -industrial levels. One of the key elements of the PA is the Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) previously referred to as Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
(INDCs) before the ratification of PA. Bangladesh submitted its  INDC to UNFCCC on 25 September 
2015, for three sectors (Power, Industry and Transport). Subsequently, Bangladesh prepared the 
NDC Implementation Roadmap and Action Plan in 2018.   
Bangladesh’s INDC proposed for 12 million tons (5%) unconditional reduction in GHG emission from 
Business as Usual (BAU) scenario by 2030 and a further 24 million tons (10%) conditional reduction 
in GHG emission with support from the international community taking the base year 2011.  
As part of the global initiative, Bangladesh is updating the NDC incorporating additional sectors 
following IPCC guidelines. The updated NDC covers Energy, Industrial Processes and Product Use 
(IPPU), Agriculture, Forestry and other Land use (AFOLU) and Waste. For the NDC update, 2012 has 
been considered as the base year following the Third National Communication of Bangladesh, which 
details a comprehensive national GHG emission inventory for 2012.  
In this NDC update, information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of Bangladesh’s 
NDC in line with the guidelines set out in Katowice decisions (COP24/CMA1) is presented in the 
form of template in the last part of this document. 
The NDC update aims to further mitigation actions that Bangladesh may take to tackle its growing 
emissions and play its role in global efforts. The NDC calls for a number of mitigation actions that 
will help limit the country’s GHG emissions. These actions will play a key role in realizing the move 
to a low -carbon, climate-resilient economy and becoming a middle -income country whilst ensuring 
that it will not cross the average per capita emissions of the developing countries. 2 
Base Year and Future Emission 
Scenario 
As part of the global initiative, Bangladesh is updating its NDC. Th is updated NDC covers Energy 
(Power, transport, energy use in industry, residential, commercial, agriculture and brick 
manufacturing, F-gases and Fugitive emission), Industrial Processes & Product Use  (IPPU), 
Agriculture, Forestry and other Land use (AFOLU) and Waste sectors.  In this aspe ct, the NDC is 
incorporating additional sectors according to IPCC guidelines to ensure comprehensive coverage. So, 
the Updated NDC  tries to represent an economy-wide GHG emission reduction  taking in to account 
lack of required information under AFOLU . The updated NDC is prepared following a structured 
process involving stakeholders from relevant ministries and agencies. The required data has been 
collected through IPCC suggested structured template from the agencies on present condition and 
future plans and  projects relevant to GHG emission reduction. Following this, the initial scenario 
analysis outcomes ha ve been validated with the relevant ministries and agencies in a validation 
workshop. The possible mitigation measures have been finalized based on discu ssion on the 
validation process. 
Base Year Scenario 
For the NDC update, 2012 has been considered for the base year following the Third National 
Communication of Bangladesh, detailing a comprehensive national GHG emission inventory for 
2012. Energy, IPPU, A FOLU and Waste Sectors are considered for GHG emission inventory 
preparation.  
Power, Transport and Industry are three major sub -sectors under the Energy Sector, while Brick 
manufacturing, Residential and commercial buildings (energy use), Energy us e in Ag riculture 
activities (pumps, tractors, harvester etc.) and fish farms, F-gases (HCFC use) in air conditioning and 3 
refrigeration and Fugitive emission from gas transmission and distribution systems, flaring in oil/ 
gas fields etc. are considered as other sub-sectors of the Energy Sector.  
The Power sub -sector includes emissions from electricity generation activities from coal, gas, 
furnace oil-based power plants and different renewable energy sources such as solar home system, 
solar park, solar mini & micro grid, rooftop solar and net metering, solar irrigation, hydro, wind, 
biomass and biogas. Transport sub -sector comprises fuel combustion emission from the road, rail 
and inland water transport . Industry sub -sector covers energy use in i ndustry covering fuel  and 
electricity use in industrial activities.  
The IPPU sector covers industrial process based emissions from cement clinker production and urea 
fertilizer production. The AFOLU (agriculture) sub-sector covers methane emission from cultivated 
rice fields,  nitrous oxide emission from nitrogen-based fertilizer, methane emission from enteric 
fermentation of livestock and methane and emission from manure management. The AFOLU 
(forestry) sub-sector covers emissions from forest areas and carbon stock in Banglade sh. The Waste 
sector covers methane emission from solid waste disposal and domestic wastewater.  
For the base year, total GHG emission accounts for 169.05 million tons CO2 equivalent ( MtCO2e). 
Energy Sector holds the higher contribution to the total GHG emissi on which is 93.09 Mt CO2e or 
55.07% of the total, followed by AFOLU (27.35% of total), Waste (14.26% of total) and IPPU (3.32% 
of total) Sectors.  
Power, Transport, Industry, Household and Brick Kilns are five major sub-sectors which contributes 
most (total 82.62 Mt CO2e) to the Energy Sector emission. At the same time, Commercial, Agriculture, 
Fugitive and F-Gases sub-sectors generate the remaining. Similarly, the Agriculture sub-sector under 
the AFOLU Sector generates the highest 45.87 MtCO2e, about 27.13 % of the total GHG emission for 
the base scenario. According to IPCC guidelines  for Forestry sub-sector, Bangladesh has established 
a Forest Reference Level (FRL) for the historical reference period 2000 -2015. The estimated 
emission from the forestry secto r is 1.19 MtCO2e/year, and the estimated removal is 0.81  
MtCO2e/year. The net change, FRL, is 0.37 MtCO2e/year. Waste and IPPU Sector generates 24.11 and 
5.61 MtCO2e emission respectively.   
The following table 1 presents the sector-wise GHG emission for the Base year scenario.  
Table 1: GHG emission in Base Year (2012) 
UNFCCC Sector Sub-Sector 
GHG Emission  
Base year 2012 
Million Ton CO2e In Percentage 
Energy 
Power 20.98 12.41 
Transport 16.77 9.92 
Industry (energy) 16.47 9.74 
Other energy sub sectors:     
Households 16.67 9.86 
Commercial 0.45 0.27 
Agriculture 2.73 1.61 
Brick Kilns 11.73 6.94 
Fugitive 4.37 2.58 
F Gases 2.92 1.73 4 
UNFCCC Sector Sub-Sector 
GHG Emission  
Base year 2012 
Million Ton CO2e In Percentage 
Total Energy  93.09 55.07 
IPPU Cement and Fertilizer 5.61 3.32 
AFOLU Agriculture and Livestock 45.87 27.13 
Forestry 0.37 0.22 
Total AFOLU  46.24 27.35 
Waste Municipal Solid Waste 
and wastewater 24.11 14.26 
Total Emission 169.05  
The base year GHG emission scenario for 2012, has been updated with additional information for 
Fugitive emission from leakages in the gas distribution network, F -gases, gas and electricity use in 
households. This information was not included in the TNC. So, there is an increase in total emission 
from 152.27 MtCO2e to 169. 05 MtCO2e.  
Business As Usual Scenario 
The BAU scenario is prepared considering the contribution of emission sources and information that 
has been collected from the relevant agencies of different ministries following the IPCC 2006 
reporting guidelines. The BAU scenario does not contain any mitigative measures. The BAU scenario 
has been modeled following the use of conventional technology  and national projections of 
development.  
Critical assumptions for modelling GHG emission for BAU scenarios are:  
 In the energy sector, BAU is prepared following the Power Sector Master Pla n (2016) with 
additional modifications of plans from the Ministry of Power and mineral resources; Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan (2015)  for industry, residential and commercial; 
previous trend -based projection for Transport; Brick sector ro admap and D epartment of 
Environment information on Brick manufacturing, National Cooling Action Plan and 
Montreal protocol targets for F-gases.  
 In the IPPU sector, previous trends and demand-based projections have been made.  
 In AFOLU sector, BAU is prepa red following rice cropping area and livestock population 
projection for 2030 from relevant Ministries and agencies; Forestry related emission is 
taken from Bangladesh’s Forest Reference Level (FRL ) and kept as constant.  No mitigation 
scenario analysis was carried out for Other Land Use.  
 BAU is prepared based on the extrapolation of waste generation using urban population 
estimates (UN data) and waste generation rate (Third  National Communication ) in the 
Waste sector. 
Total GHG emission is found to be increased from 169.05 Mt CO2e in 2012 to 409.4 Mt CO2e in 2030 
under the Business as Usual (BAU) scenario with an increase of 2.4  times than base year . The 
following table 2 presents the sector-wise distribution of the GHG emission for the BAU scenario in 
2030. 5 
The sector -wise emissions under BAU scenario by 2030 are 312.54 Mt CO2e (76.34% of total)  in 
Energy, 10.97 Mt CO2e (2.68% of total) in IPPU, 55.01 Mt CO2e (13.44% of total) in AFOLU and 30.89 
Mt CO2e (7.55% of total) in Waste Sectors.  
The h ighest contribution (24.91% of total) of GHG emission is  found for Industry (energy) sub -
sector followed by Power (23.24% of total) and Transport (8.86% of total) under the Energy Sector.  
Table 2: GHG emission in BAU scenario (2030) 
UNFCCC Sector Sub-Sector 
GHG Emission 
BAU 2030 
Million Ton CO2e In Percentage 
Energy 
Power 95.14 23.24 
Transport 36.28 8.86 
Industry (energy) 101.99 24.91 
Other energy sub-sectors:     
Households 30.41 7.43 
Commercial 3.35 0.82 
Agriculture 10.16 2.48 
Brick Kilns 23.98 5.86 
Fugitive 8.31 2.03 
F Gases 2.92 0.71 
Total Energy  312.54 76.34 
IPPU Cement and Fertilizer 10.97 2.68 
AFOLU Agriculture and Livestock 54.64 13.35 
Forestry 0.37 0.09 
Total AFOLU  55.01 13.44 
Waste Municipal Solid Waste and 
wastewater 30.89 7.55 
Total Emission 409.41 6 
Mitigation Action 
The mitigation scenario analysis and assessment of achievable but ambitious unconditional and 
conditional GHG mitigation measures by 2030 for the NDC update has been prepared following IPCC 
guidelines and  stakeholder consultation . In the unconditional part of NDC, only those mitigation 
measures were considered which would be implemented based on current local -level capacity, and 
financed through internal resources. Contingent upon international funding and  technological 
support, the conditional emission reduction will be implemented. The following sections present the 
updated unconditional and conditional contributions.  
 
Unconditional Contribution 
In the unconditional scenario, GHG emissions would be reduc ed by 27.56 Mt CO2e (6.73%) below 
BAU in 2030 in the respective sectors. 26.3 Mt CO2e (95.4%) of this emission reduction will be from 
the Energy sector while 0.6 4 (2.3%) and 0.6 ( 2.2%) Mt CO2e reduction will be from AFOLU 
(agriculture) and waste sector respectively. There will be no reduction in the IPPU sector.  
Conditional Contribution 
In the conditional scenario, GHG emissions would be reduced by 61.9 Mt CO 2e ( 15.12%) below 
BAU in 2030  in the respective sectors . This reduction is in addition to the proposed reductions in 
unconditional scenario. The conditional mitigation measures will be implemented by Bangladesh, 
only if there is external financial/technology support. The conditional scenario has 59.7Mt CO2e 
(96.46%) emission reduction from the Energy sect or, while 0.4 (0.65%) and 1.84 (2.97%) Mt CO2e 
reduction will be from AFOLU (agriculture) and Waste Sector respectively. There will be no 
reduction in the IPPU Sector. Table 3  presents the GHG reduction under unconditional and 
conditional scenarios. 7 
Table 3: GHG emission reduction scenario 
UNFCCC 
Sector Sub-sector 
GHG Emission 
Scenario GHG Reduction by Mitigation (2030) 
BAU 2030 Unconditional Conditional Combined 
MtCO2e In % MtCO2e Reduction 
MtCO2e In % MtCO2e Reduction 
MtCO2e In % Reduction 
MtCO2e In % 
Energy 
Power 95.14 23.24 87.13 8.01 29.06 51.4 35.73 57.72 43.74 48.9 
Transport 36.28 8.86 32.89 3.39 12.30 26.56 6.33 10.23 9.72 10.86 
Industry (energy) 101.99 24.91 95.33 6.66 24.17 94.31 1.02 1.65 7.68 8.58 
Other energy sub 
sectors:             
Households 30.41 7.43 28.78 1.63 5.91 24.77 4.01 6.46 5.64 6.3 
Commercial 3.35 0.82 2.94 0.41 1.49 2.51 0.43 0.69 0.84 0.94 
Agriculture 10.16 2.48 9.37 0.79  2.87 10.13  0.03 0.05  0.82  0.92 
Brick Kilns 23.98 5.86 20.7 3.28 11.90 12.82 7.88 12.73 11.16 12.47 
Fugitive 8.31 2.03 8.31   4.03 4.28 6.91 4.28 4.78 
F Gases 2.92 0.71 0.78 2.14 7.76 0.03 0.75 1.21 2.89 3.23 
Total 
Energy  312.54 76.34 286.23 26.31 95.46 226.56 59.71 96.46 85.98 96.1 
IPPU Cement and 
Fertilizer 10.97 2.68 10.97    10.97        
AFOLU 
Agriculture and 
Livestock 54.64 13.35 54 0.64 2.32 53.6 0.4 0.65 1.04 1.16 
Forestry 0.37 0.09 0.37    0.37      
Total 
AFOLU  55.01 13.44 54.37 0.64 2.32 53.97 0.4 0.65 1.68 1.16 
Waste MSW and 
wastewater 30.89 7.55 30.28 0.61 2.21 28.44 1.84 2.97 2.45 2.74 
Total Emission 409.41  381.85   319.94         
Total Reduction   27.56 6.73   61.9 15.12 89.47 21.85 
Note: INDC (2015) proposed 12 MtCO2e (5%) reduction in unconditional and a further 24 MtCO2e (10%) reduction in 
conditional scenario 
Note: NDC (2020) proposed 27.56 MtCO2e (6.73%) reduction in unconditional and an additional 61.91 MtCO2e (15.12%) 
reduction in conditional scenario. 
 
This contribution is based on  the analysis carried out in 2020 -21 using the best available data.  
However data quality and availabil ity is an issue in Bangladesh. If new and more robust data comes  
to light in the future, or if assumptions change (e.g. projections of population or economic growth)  
the government will update its analysis accordingly. This will be coordinated with the National 
Communication and Biennial Update Report reporting cycle.  
 
Potential Actions 
Unconditional Contribution 
The targeted GHG emission reduction for unconditional contributions will be implemented through a 
set of mitigation actions. The potential mitigations actions are elaborated in Table 4. 8 
Table 4: Possible Mitigation Actions to deliver the Unconditional Contribution 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
Energy Power  
 Implementation of renewable 
energy projects 
 Enhanced efficiency of 
existing power plants  
 Use of improved technology 
for power generation 
 
 
 
Transport 
 Improvement of fuel 
efficiency for transport sub -
sector  
 Increase use of less emission -
based transport system and 
improve Inland Water 
Transport System  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power  
 Implementation of renewable energy projects of 911.8 
MW  
 Grid-connected Solar -581 MW, Wind -149 MW, 
Biomass-20 MW, Biogas -5 MW, New Hydro -100 
MW, Solar Mini-grid-56.8 MW 
 Installation of new Co mbined Cycle Gas based power 
plant (3208 MW)  
 Efficiency improvement of Existing Gas Turbine power 
plant (570 MW)  
 Installation of prepaid meter 
 
Transport 
 Improvement of road traffic congestion (5% 
improvement in fuel efficiency)  
 Widening of roads (2 to 4 lanes) and improving road 
quality 
 Construct NMT and bicycle lanes 
 Electronic Road Pricing (ERP) or congestion 
charging 
 Reduction of private cars and encourage electric and 
hybrid vehicles  
 Development of Urban Transport Master Plans 
(UTMP) to improve tra nsport systems in line with 
the Urban Plan/ City Plan for all major cities and 
urban area  
 Introducing Intelligent Transport System (ITS) based 
public transport management system to ensure 
better performance, enhance reliability, safety and 
service 
 Modal s hift from road to rail (10% modal shift of 
passenger-km) through different Transport projects such 
as BRT, MRT in major cities , Multi -modal hub creation, 
Padma Bridge etc.  
 Purchase of modern rolling stock and signaling 
system for railway 
 Electrification o f the railway system and double - 9 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
 
 
 
 
Industry  
 Increase e nergy efficiency in 
the Industry sub-sector   
 
Agriculture  
 Enhanced use  of solar energy 
in Agriculture  
Brick Kilns  
 Enforcement and Improved 
technology use 
Residential and Commercial  
 Enhanced use of energy -
efficient appliances in 
household and commercia l 
buildings  
F-Gases  
Implement Montreal Protocol 
targets 
track construction  
 Improved and enhanced Inland Water Transport (IWT) 
system (Improve navigation for regional, sub -regional, 
and local routes, improve maintenance of water vessel to 
enhance engine performance, introduce ele ctric water 
vessel etc.) 
 
Industry  
 Achieve 10% Energy efficiency in the Industry sub-sector 
through measures according to the Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Master Plan (EECMP)  
Agriculture  
 Implementation of 5925 Nos. s olar irrigation pumps 
(generating 176.38MW) for agriculture 
Brick Kilns  
 14% emission reduction through Banning Fixed Chimney 
kiln (FCK), encourage advanced technology and non -fired 
brick use 
Residential and Commercial  
 Use energy -efficient appliances in household and 
commercial buildi ngs (achieve 5% and 12% reduction in 
emission respectively) 
F-Gases  
 Reduction of Ozone Depleting Gases (HCFCs) use in air 
conditioning as per Montreal protocol targets by 2025 
AFOLU Agriculture  
 Reduction of emission from 
Rice Field, Fertiliser User, 
Enteric Fermentation and 
Manure Management  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture  
Methane emission reduction from Rice field 
 Upscaling Alternate Wetting and Dryin g (AWD)  in dry 
season rice field in 50,000 ha of crop lands  
 Rice Varietal Improvement for 1,111,000 ha crop lands 
Nitrous Oxide emission reduction  from nitrogen-based 
Fertilizer  
 209,000 ha crop land Management (leaf color chart, soil 
test based fertili zer application, less tillage barn 
management etc.) 
 Improvement of fertilizer management (deep placement 
of urea in rice field, training, awareness) in 50,000 ha  
 Bringing more area under pulse cultivation 10 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forestry 
 Deforestation reduction  
 Reforestation/ Afforestation 
 Forest restoration 
 Increase tree cover 
Methane emission from Enteric Fermentation 
 Replacement of low -productive animals with high -
producing crossbred cattle (Large Ruminant – 0.94 
million and Small Ruminant – 0.89 million) 
 Feed improvement by using a balanced diet and beneficial 
micro-organisms for livestock  (Large Ruminant – 0.51 
million and Small Ruminant – 0.68 million) 
Methane and Nitrous Oxide emission from Manure 
management 
 Improved manure management through promotion of 
mini biogas plants (57,000 nos.) 
 Awareness and training programme  
Forestry  
 Increase forest cover. 
 Increase tree cover from 22.37% (2014) to 24%. 
 Afforestation and reforestation in the coastal areas, 
islands and degraded areas – 150,000 ha. 
 Restore the deforested forests – 137,800 ha at the hill and 
plain land sal forest.  
 Restore the degraded forests – 200,000 ha at the hill and 
plain land sal forest.  
 Plantation in roadsides, embankments, private lands etc.  
Waste  Improved Municipal solid 
waste management  
 Ensure 3R principle for waste 
management  
 Establishment of Waste to Energy plant in Dhaka 
 Establishment of Incineration plant in one City  
 Regional Integrated Landfill and Resource Recovery 
Facility in One City  
Conditional Contribution 
The mitigation actions for conditional contributions will be  in a more extensive way along with the 
unconditional contribution. A set o f potential mitigation actions  for conditional contributions are 
described in Table 5.  
 Table 5: Possible Mitigation Actions to deliver the Conditional Contribution 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
Energy Power  
 Implementation of renewable 
Power  
 Implementation of renewable energy projects of 4114.3 11 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
energy projects 
 Enhanced efficiency of 
existing power plants  
 Use of improved technology 
for Power generation 
 
 
 
 
 
Transport 
 Improvement of fuel 
efficiency for transport sub -
sector  
 Increase use of less emission -
based transport system and 
improve Inland Water 
Transport System  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MW 
 Grid-connected Solar -2277 MW, Wind -597 MW, 
Biomass-50 MW, Biogas -5 MW, New Hydro -1000 
MW, Solar Mini-grid-56.8 MW, Waste to Electricity-
128.5 MW 
 Coal  power plant with Ultra super critical technology -
12147 MW 
 Installation of new Combined Cycle Gas based power 
plant (5613 MW)  
 Efficiency impro vement of Existing Gas Turbine power 
plant (570 MW)  
 Installation of prepaid meter 
 Bring down total T&D loss to a single digit by 2030 
Transport 
 Improvement of road traffic congestion ( 15% 
improvement in fuel efficiency)  
 Widening of roads (2 to 4 lanes) a nd improving road 
quality 
 Construct NMT and bicycle lanes 
 Electronic Road Pricing (ERP) or congestion 
charging 
 Reduction of private cars and encourage electric and 
hybrid vehicles  
 Development of Urban Transport Master Plans 
(UTMP) to improve transport sys tems in line with 
the Urban Plan/ City Plan for all major cities and 
urban area  
 Introducing Intelligent Transport System (ITS) based 
public transport management system to ensure 
better performance, enhance reliability, safety and 
service 
 Establish chargin g station network and electric 
buses in major cities 
 Modal shift from road to rail ( 25% modal shift of 
passenger-km) through different Transport projects such 
as BRT, MRT in major cities, Multi -modal hub creation, 
new bridges etc.  
 Purchase of modern rolli ng stock and signaling 12 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry  
 Increase energy efficiency in 
Industry sub-sector   
 
 
 
Agriculture  
 Enhanced use of solar energy 
in Agriculture  
Brick Kilns  
 Enforcement and Improved 
technology use 
 
Residential and Commercial  
 Enhanced use of energy -
efficient appliances in 
household and commercial 
buildings  
F-Gases  
 Further reduction of Ozone 
Depleting Gases 
Fugitive  Emission  
 Gas leakage reduction 
system for railway 
 Electrification of the railway system and double -
track construction  
 Improved and enhanced Inland Water Transport (IWT) 
system (Improve navigation for regional, sub -regional, 
and local routes, improve maintenance o f water vessel to 
enhance engine performance, introduce electric water 
vessel etc.) 
Industry  
 Achieve 20% Energy efficiency in the Industry sub-sector 
through measures according to the Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Master Plan (EECMP)  
 Promote green Industry  
 Promote carbon financing  
Agriculture  
 Implementation of 4102 Nos. solar irrigation pumps 
(generating 164 MW) for agriculture 
Brick Kilns  
 47% emission reduction through Banning Fixed Chimney 
kiln (FCK), encourage advanced technology and non -fired 
brick use 
Residential and Commercial  
 Use energy -efficient appliances in household and 
commercial buildings (achieve 19% and 25% reduction in 
emission respectively) 
 
F-Gases  
 Reduction of Ozone Depleting Gases (HCFCs) use in air 
conditioning after 2025. 
Fugitive  Emission  
 51% emission reduction from Gas leakage through CDM 
projects 
AFOLU Agriculture  
 Reduction of emission from 
Rice Field, Fertiliser User, 
Enteric Fermentation and 
Manure Management  
Agriculture  
Methane emission reduction from Rice field 
 Upscaling Alternate Wetting and Drying (AWD)  in dry 
season rice field in 100,000 ha of crop lands 13 
Sector Description Actions by 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forestry 
 Deforestation reduction  
 Reforestation/ Afforestation 
 Forest restoration 
 Maintain forest and tree 
cover 
 Rice Varietal Improvement for 2,129,000 ha crop lands 
Nitrous Oxide emission reduction from nitrogen -based 
Fertilizer  
 627,000 ha crop land Management (leaf color  chart, soil 
test based fertiliz er application, less tillage barn 
management etc.) 
 Improvement of fertilizer management (deep placement 
of urea in rice field, training, awareness) in 150,000 ha  
 Bringing more area under pulse cultivation 
Methane emission from Enteric Fermentation 
 Replacement of low -productive animals with high -
producing crossbred cattle (Large Ruminant – 1.882 
million and Small Ruminant – 1.776 million) 
 Feed improvement by using a balanced diet and beneficial 
micro-organisms for livestock  (Large Ruminant 1.013 
million and Small Ruminant – 1.355 million) 
Methane and Nitrous Oxide emission from Manure 
management 
 Improved manure management through promotion of 
mini biogas plants (107,000 nos.) 
 Expansion of awareness and training programme  
Forestry  
 Maintain the forest cover and tree cover through 
collaborative forest management, social forestry and 
other programs. 
 Forest conservation by Scale -up of alternative income -
generating activity for forest -dependent communities -
55,000 nos. families 
 Co-management in Protected areas -72,000 ha 
 Additional coastal afforestation activities. 
 Maintain the restoration of degraded or deforested areas. 
 Plantation in roadsides, embankments, private lands etc.  
Waste  Improved Municipal solid 
waste management  
 Ensure 3R principle for waste 
management  
 Improvement of Sewerage 
treatment  
 Establishment of Incineration plant in 3 Cities  
 Implementation of wastewater treatment plants in 
several cities 
 Expansion of Regional Integrated Landfill and Resource 
Recovery Facility in other cities 14 
Along with these measures, a set of initiatives will be undertaken for IPPU Sector. However, no GHG 
emission reduction is committed for this Sector. The potential mitigation measures in IPPU sector 
includes switching to more efficient industrial processes in fertilizer and cement manufacturing. The 
cement factories can switch to technologies like vertical roller mills, resulting in energy savings. In 
fertilizer manufacturing, one Industry has been established with the modern and efficient process, 
and a few more are in the pipeline. 15 
Achievements and Initiatives 
Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan up to 2030 
Bangladesh has assumed the presidency of the 48 -nation Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) and the 
Vulnerable Twenty (V20) Group of Finance Ministers. Honorable Prime Minister of Bangladesh H.E. 
Sheikh Hasina is serving as Chair of the CVF since June 2020. As Ch air of the CVF, Honorable Prime 
Minister has launched a program to develop “Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan” for Bangladesh. The 
Plan will be the first of CVF plans, with a strategic investment framework to mobilize financing, 
especially through internationa l cooperation, for implementing renewable energy and climate 
resilience initiatives. The Draft plan identifies several key initiatives, which focus in renewable 
energy,  energy storage infrastructure, power grid modernization, Established carbon market 
regime, Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 resilience bonds, training and skills development for future, 
Future-proof Bangladesh’s industries, locally -led adaptation outcomes, Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprise financial protection and productivity enhancement, Clima te-Resilient and Nature -Based 
agricultural and fisheries development, environment friendly transport, climate resilient well -being 
programs and Accelerated digital revolution. 
Ashrayan: Shelter for the Homeless and Landless 
The government is implementing t he shelter  project for landless and homeless people. Under the 
project, 442,608 families have been rehabilitated in 22640 barracks  and 0.26 million houses. 
Additionally, 4,409 climate refugee families are being rehabilitated in Khuruskul, Cox’s Bazar. 
Besides enhancing disaster resilience, the project also focuses on mitigation through implementing 
1.58 million tree plantations, rainwater harvesting, Solar Home System  based alternate power 
sources, improved cook stoves etc. Besides this, 50,104 families hav e been rehabilitated by the 
Cluster village project, where 0.455 million trees have been planted. 16 
National Solar Energy Roadmap, 2021-2041  
The National Solar Energy Roadmap, 2021 - 2041 has been drafted to frame a long -term vision for 
the nation and set possible capacity targets for the country’s solar energy initiative . This outline the 
broader strategies required to achieve those targets. Based on three implementation scenarios, the 
Roadmap delineates a few general as well as specific and time -bound mea sures to achieve that 
target by the year 2041. 
National Action Plan for Clean Cooking, 2020-2030 
Bangladesh’s Country Action Plan for Clean Cook Stoves 2013 (CAP 2013) focused predominantly on 
the removal of existing financing barriers by enabling access to capital by SMEs, promoting access to 
climate funds, leveraging government funds to finance women -led businesses in the sector and 
lobbying for additional financing options from international donors at low rates. About 4.5 million 
improved cook stoves hav e been distributed already. A new National Action Plan for Clean Cooking 
in Bangladesh (2020-2030) is being formulated following its success. 
Forest and Carbon Inventories and Tree Plantation 
Bangladesh Forest Department (BFD) conducted National Forest Inv entory (NFI) during 2016-2019 
to identify the status of forest and tree resources, carbon and biomass stock, dependency of local 
people on trees and forests and the ecology. The government has developed the Forest Reference 
Level (FRL) and Forest Reference  Emission Level (FREL) and submitted them to the UNFCCC. To 
reduce the carbon emission from the forestry sector, Bangladesh formulated Bangladesh National 
REDD+ Strategy (BNRS) . It established a National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS) for periodical 
monitoring of tree and forest cover. To celebrate the birth centenary of the Father of the Nation 
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, BFD has planted 10 million tree saplings around Bangladesh. 
The Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief has planted 5.4 milli on Palm trees which will 
contribute to carbon sink and reduce the risk of death due to lightning.  
Bangladesh National Action Plan for Reducing Short-Lived Climate Pollutants 
The NAP-SLCPs were formulated with support from the Climate and Clean Air Coaliti on in February 
2012 to reduce SLCPs. The plan focuses on identifying and implement ing the most cost -effective 
measures for large -scale implementation of SLCP mitigation. Eleven priority mitigation measures 
were included in the SLCP Plan, six of which targe t primary black carbon sources, while the rest five 
target major methane sources. The plan’s full implementation is expected to reduce black carbon 
emissions by 40% and methane emission by 17% in 2030 compared to a business as usual (BAU) 
scenario.  
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan up to 2030 
Under this comprehensive plan, the government aims to lower energy intensity (national primary 
energy consumption per unit of GDP) in 2030 by 20% compared to the 2013 level. A total of 95 
million toe (113 billion m3 of gas equivalent) is expected to be saved during the period.  
Renewable Energy Initiatives 
Bangladesh has taken up a number of initiatives to enhance the best utilization of renewable energy. 
Bangladesh has installed more than 6 million solar -home systems (SHSs) across the country 17 
benefiting more than 18 million (11%) population. Around 66 MW is being produced through roof 
top solar panels installed in government and private buildings. 2226 solar irrigation systems have 
been installed around th e country. The government has extended a re -financing scheme to finance 
alternative energy generation projects like small scale solar and micro grids, to improve energy 
access in off- grid areas.  
Promoting Green Technology 
Bangladesh Bank established a re finance scheme to support environment-friendly technology such 
as solar energy, bio -gas plants, and Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP). The initial projcts focused on 
only 10 products, which has increased to 50 products under 11 categories: renewable energy, 
energy efficiency, solid waste management, liquid waste management, alternative energy, fire burnt 
brick, non-fire block brick, recycling and recyclable product, ensuring safety in work environment of 
factories, etc. 39 banks and 19 financial institutions have signed a participation agreement with 
Bangladesh Bank to avail finance from this scheme. 
Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund  
The Bangladesh Climate Change Trust Fund (BCCTF) has undertaken 800 projects with an 
investment of 449.3 million USD to impl ement strategic actions of the Bangladesh Climate Change 
Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP), which mainly focus on adaptation, mitigation and climate change 
research.  
Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 
The government has recently adopted the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, a comprehensive 100 -year 
strategic plan aimed at gradual sustainable development through adaptive delta management 
process. The Delta plan has included climate change as a significant future challenge. It reaffirms 
Bangladesh’s commitment to reducing  GHG emissions from key sectors through efforts like 
promoting improved rice parboiling system s and ensure energy efficiency, research on the 
suitability of various tree species for their carbon -locking properties suitable for forestry programs. 
The plan t argets to achieve a safe, climate-resilient and prosperous delta with a mission to ensure 
long term water and food security, economic growth and environmental sustainability, effectively 
reducing vulnerability to natural disasters and building resilience t o climate change. Total 80 
projects are planned to be implemented with $37 billion investment, while 34 projects are identified 
as climate-sensitive. 
National Adaptation Plan  
Bangladesh is currently preparing the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to address climate change. 
This will include an overview on climate change hazard, risk and vulnerability for Bangladesh. 
Current adaptation strategies for different impacts due to climate change undertaken in different 
projects/initiatives from both the government a nd NGO/CSOs will be identified and Success 
stories/case studies on resilient adaptation options will be included in the NAP.  The plan will 
include future recommendations on mentioned issues foc using on regional and local level solutions 
along with strategies at national level. A set of recommendations for institutions and implementation 
mechanism for NAP will be included. 18 
Adaptation Action 
As stated earlier , mitigation and adaptation often coexist , and quite a few adaptation actions have 
mitigation co -benefits. Bangladesh's NDC , therefore, has an adaptation component that describes 
what Bangladesh has already done on adaptation and what are the priorities for the future long-term 
vision for adaptation keeping synergies with mitigation actions . Since the d evelopment of 
comprehensive National Adaptation Plan (NAP) is currently underway, Bangladesh wishes to 
communicate adaptation communication drawing the inputs from NAP process next year. The two 
vital national plans to address climate change in Bangladesh are the National Adaptation Programme 
of Action (NAPA), developed in 2005 and subsequently revised in 2009, and the Bangladesh Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP), released in 2009. BCCSAP comprised 44 Programmes 
under six thematic areas to de al with adverse impacts of climate change as well as supporting low 
carbon economic growth.  The priority pillars for implementing strategies were : (1) Food security, 
social protection and health; (2) Comprehensive disaster management; (3) Infrastructure 
development; (4) Research and knowledge management; (5) Mitigation and low carbon 
development; and (6) Capacity building and institutional development . BCCSAP is in the final stages 
of being updated to make it more appropriate in keeping with advancement s in science, technology 
and knowledge since its first formulation. 
Climate Change Trust Fund Act 2010 (CCTFA) was introduced in response to the need for a specific 
law for handling Climate Change Trust Fund (CCTF) of the Government of Bangladesh with 
transparency so that the benefits accruing from CCTF -financed projects reach the intended 
beneficiaries.  
As a first CVF plan, the draft “Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan”, aims at mobilizing financing, primarily 
through international cooperation, for implementing cl imate resilience initiatives such as an 
expansion of locally -led adaptation, the establishment of carbon market regime, Bangladesh Delta 
Plan 2100 resilience bonds, climate -resilient and nature -based agricultural and fisheries 19 
development, climate resilient well-being programs and accelerated digital revolution, training and 
skills development.  
The NAP formulation will identify the co-benefits so that the synergy between adaptation and 
mitigation can be fully achieved. As all such activities need to be financed and proper incentives need 
to be provided, t he government has formulated and operationalized a Climate Fiscal Framework 
(CFF), providing principles and tools for climate fiscal policy-making (CFP).  
8th FYP, Bangladesh Country Investment Plan for Environment, Forestry and Climate Change (2016-
2020) (EFCC CIP), Perspective Plan for 2021 -2041 (PP2041) emphasizes the importance of 
managing climate change and indicates the priorities for implementing the BCCSAP.  Other sectoral 
plans and strategies also focus on adaptation action to climate change. 
The Forest Investment Plan (FIP, 2017 -2022) has been developed to identify future investment 
opportunities to increase the forest cover, reduce deforestation and forest degradation and improve 
the livelihoods of  the forest-dependent people through the implementation of participatory/social 
forestry. 
The Government of Bangladesh has demonstrated its commitment to undertake both adaptation and 
mitigation efforts as part of its plan for sustainable development. Ever y year the Government 
channels resources for significant investment in projects/programs for  ensuring climate resilience. 
It currently spends US$1 billion a year, around 6 to 7 per cent of its annual budget, on climate change 
adaptation (CCA). However, the World Bank estimates that the country would need US$5.7 billion as 
adaptation finance by 2050, which is more than 5 times higher than the current expenditure for 
CCA.1 Three-quarters of money spent on  climate change in the country comes directly from the 
government, while the rest comes from  international development partners including bilateral, 
multi-lateral and private funding. Some significant achievements towards climate change adaptation 
at the national level are briefly described below: 
Sustainable Ecosystem and Livelihood 
Bangladesh Forest Department (BFD) is currently implementing the Sustainable Forests & 
Livelihoods Project (SUFAL) supported by World Bank, to improve forest management and increase 
benefits for forest dependent communities in targ eted sites by financing nearly 79,000 hectares of 
forests on public and private lands, including about 22,000 hectares of coastal green belt across 147 
Upazilas (sub -districts). The project emphasizes sustainable livelihood options for the forest 
dependent communities and engages them in ecosystem management to ensure the sustainability of 
the forest resources. 
Some of the completed projects for sustainable ecosystem management are - Climate Resilient 
Ecosystem and Livelihoods (CREL), Integrating Community-based Adaptation into Afforestation and 
Reforestation Programme in Bangladesh and Climate Resilient Participatory Afforestation and 
Reforestation Project (CRPARP). These projects helped reduce forest degradation and to build the 
long-term resilience of selected communities to climate change. 
                                                           
1 MoF (2020). Climate Finance for Sustainable Development. Finance Division, Ministry of Finance, Government of the People’s 
Republic of Bangladesh. Available at: 2020-2021_Climate_BR_English.pdf (portal.gov.bd) 20 
Disaster Management 
The Coastal Embankment Improvement Project (CEIP) has helped Bangladesh mitigate some of the 
most significant impacts of cyclones and flooding and enhanced emergency response in the coastal 
region. Th e project costs US$ 400 million and is supported by the Pilot Program for Climate 
Resilience (PPCR), a targeted fund within the Climate Investment Funds (CIF) framework. Since 
2013, the project has increased the protection of 183,900 people including 91,95 0 women with 
increased resilience to climate change in selected polders from tidal flooding and storm surges. As of 
May 2019, the project has protected 21,700 ha of gross area and upgraded 130.58 km embankment. 
A comprehensive analysis is being undertaken to understand the coastal dynamics better and 
increase climate resilience in the coastal area. 
Other relevant programs that have been implemented over the last decade are National Resilience 
Programme, Project for Enhancing Capacity on Planning and Impleme ntation of Regional Disaster 
Risk Reduction , Information Management System for Disaster Risk Management, Enhancing the 
Capacity of CPP Volunteers and Coastal fisherman to Cope with Climate Change, Construction of 
Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters in Coastal Ar eas and Construction of Flood Shelter in Flood Prone 
Areas across the Country and Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme II. 
Agriculture and Food Security 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock and Ministry of Food have 
contributed to climate change adaptation through the activities  related to, r esearch and education 
program; agricultural extension and training; production, standardization, certification, preservation 
and distribution; support and rehabilitation; minor irrigation programs; and improved value chain. 
The ministries have initiated many investment projects/programmes which focus mainly on 
increasing food productivity and sustaining growth in the face of the adverse effect of climate 
change. Some of the notable projects are- National Agricultural Technology Program-Phase II Project 
(NATP-2), support to seaweed cultivation, processing and marketing through assessment and 
capacity development, Enhanced Coastal Fisheries (ECOFISH BD), Community -based Climate 
Resilient F isheries and Aquaculture Development in Bangladesh, Inclusive agriculture and agro -
industrial value chain development as an enabler of poverty reduction in Bangladesh, South West 
Region Livestock Development Project, Establishment of Regional Duck Breeding  Farm along with 
Hatchery (3rd Phase), Scavenging Poultry Conservation and Development Project, and 
Establishment of Fish Landing Centers in Haor Area, Institutionalization of Food Safety in 
Bangladesh for Safer Food, Construction of new food storage, and Modern Food Storage Facilities. 
Water Resources Management 
Ministry of Water Resources has a major function in addressing the adverse impacts of climate 
change. Through its recent activities, the Ministry has directly contributed to climate change 
adaptation. Projects strongly relevant to climate change under this Ministry include Char 
development and settlement project -4, Flood control and drainage improvement for removal of 
drainage congestion in Noakhali area, Climate smart agricultural water management,  and Planning 
for flood management in Bangladesh (Ganges and Brahmaputra Basin), Blue Gold Program for Water 
Management and Environmental Development. Re -excavation of small rivers, canals and water 
bodies in 64 districts (1st phase) etc.  A total 726 km ri ver bank protection, 2,123 km river 
excavation and dredging, 1,266 km embankment, excavation/ re -excavation of 181 km irrigation 21 
canal and 499 km drainage canal , 2.58 million ha land reclamation from rivers and estuary areas in 
the last 10 years  have been done. One million trees have been planted in the embankments, river/ 
canal banks to mitigate carbon emission and 2725.1 ha marsh lands were rehabilitated and included 
in fisheries culture to enhance livelihood activities by the Ministry of Livestock and fisheries. 
Surface Water Use and Rainwater Harvesting  
Several city water supply authorities are implementing projects to increase surface water use and 
reducing ground water use. These projects will reduce energy consumption for pumping 
groundwater and contribute to GHG emission reduction. Dhaka WASA has implemented three plants 
supplying 913 million litre per day (MLD) drinking water and 950 MLD capacity will be added from 
two plants under implementation. Similarly, Rajshahi WASA and Khulna WASA are  implementing a 
200 MLD capacity plant and 0.78 million cubic metre capacity reservoir. 22 
Implementation Mechanism 
Monitoring, Transparency and Institutional Aspects for NDC Implementation 
Adhering to the spirit for global action, and given the various necessar y policies and measures 
undertaken over the last few years and some of them already bearing fruits, the government is 
enhancing both unconditional and conditional contribution in the updated NDC. These contributions 
have been prepared considering the natio nal principles of maintaining a minimum 8% rate of 
economic growth, complete eradication of poverty by 2030, and food and nutrition security for all 
citizens.  
Bangladesh has prepared a n NDC implementation roadmap and action plan which suggests 
Governance arrangements for the NDC-NAP implementation framework. Bangladesh is working to 
put a workable Measurement, Reporting, and Verification ( MRV) system to maintain transparency 
and verification of its mitigation efforts and outcomes. The NDC update is based o n already planned 
projects of the government. The unconditional contribution has included confirmed mitigation 
actions from related ministries and the conditional contribution has included proposed/ planned 
mitigation actions from related ministries which would require international support.  
Capacity Building and Strengthening 
Bangladesh will need adequate finance, technology, and capacity -building support to implement the 
NDCs effectually. Capacity building has been identified as a mode of NDC enhancement . Some major 
areas for capacity building and awareness development include: 
 Enhancing the capacity of MoEFCC and DoE for effective implementation of NDC.  
 Consultation with key departments and ministries should be undertaken to understand the 
challenges they face during NDC implementation. 23 
 Capacities need to be built on regular data collection, archiving and data management for 
GHG inventory , specialized technical capa bility, and assumptions to develop of various 
emissions drivers.  
 Capacity building on MRV process and its implementation for different sectors. 
Technology Development and Transfer 
Bangladesh will require international support in Technology transfer related to GHG emission 
reduction for different sectors. The achievement of conditional contrib ution will heavily depend on 
new and more efficient technologies.  
Implementation Challenges and Barriers 
Some of the key implementation challenges identified during NDC update are as follows: 
 Lack of knowledge and awareness about NDC and mitigation among many relevant sector 
officials. An extensive awareness campaign on mitigation and NDC will be needed to 
overcome this.  
 There is a lack of basic data collection on a regular basis for industries, transport, 
agriculture, forestry and waste. Studies need to be conducted on a periodic basis to 
overcome this.  
 As the mitigation actions mostly require a large amount of money to successfully implement 
them, financial support from different agencies, banks, bilateral or multilateral funds will be 
needed.  
 As Bangladesh is a small country with a high population, food security is a significant issue. 
Rice is the primary staple crop of Bangladesh and there is a growing concern among the 
sector related community regarding emission reduction activities from rice field. The 
updated NDC incorporated a minimal emission reduction from rice fields. Further research 
and technology transfer at the field level will be required to enhance emission reduction 
from the rice field.  
 The growing need for land for human settlement, agr iculture, industries, and timber and 
fuelwood is mainly responsible for deforestation and forest degradation. Most forest loss can 
be attributed to overpopulation, poverty and unemployment, and governance. Governance 
impacts all forest types and specifical ly included problems related to uncertainty in land 
tenure and lack of capacity to implement forestry -related management, policies, and law 
enforcement. In turn, these indirect drivers lead to a suite of direct drivers of deforestation, 
namely uncontrolled  encroachment from industrialization and agriculture and illegal 
logging. So, the maintenance of existing forest land is of great concern. 
 Sustainable management of the forest land and restoration of degraded/ deforested land 
will require substantial finan cial support. Collaborative managem ent of forest areas with 
forest-dependent communities can be an effective solution to reduce degradation.   
Climate Financing 
The implementation of the proposed mitigation and adaptation actions to address climate change 
requires substantial financial resources. The Government of Bangladesh will continue to commit 
resources to climate change relevant strategies. The p rivate sector and NGOs can also contribute 
significantly to these climate change -related activities through  public-private partnerships. Banks 
and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh will continue to play a vital role in financing low -carbon 24 
climate-resilient projects and programmes through their separate Green Banking window. However, 
the full implementation of the strategic mitigation actions is conditional on the support of 
international stakeholders. The implementation of the prioritized policies and measures assume the 
continued use of existing and planned national and international financial sources through the use of 
climate finance and international market mechanisms where appropriate.  To have an idea of the 
financial needs to implement the measures, tentative cost estimation was carried out. These 
estimates were drawn from existing information from stak eholders and might need to be updated 
based on further detailed analysis.  
Energy Sector 
The cost estimate for the implementation of Key mitigations measures in the energy sector under the 
unconditional and conditional scenario is outlined in table 6.  
Table 6: Estimated cost of key mitigation measures in Energy   
Mitigation Measure Estimated investment required (million 
USD, 2021-2030) 
Unconditional Conditional 
Implementation of energy efficient coal power plant 9905 13204 
Implementation of renewable energy projects   
Grid connected Solar 1208 1845 
Wind 333 600 
Biomass 35.4 71 
Biogas 32.1 64 
Hydro 204 2166 
solar mini grid 260.5 260.5 
Implement re-powering of old power plant 561.5 561.5 
Installation of prepaid electricity meter 870 1305 
Implementation of EECMP targets 1500 1500 
Transport Plan Preparation, policy initiatives and ITS 70 500 
Implementation of MRT and BRT 4200 12470 
Multi modal Hub development 800 200 
Widening of roads , improving road quality  and 
Construct NMT and bicycle lanes 
1500 700 
Construction of Expressways  1000 
Establish charging station network and  electric buses 
in major cities 
 60000 
Purchase of modern rolling stock a nd signaling system 
for railway 
5000 5000 
Electrification of railway system and double track 
construction 
 20000 
Improved and enhanced Inland Water Transport 3000 10000 
Implementation of solar irrigation pumps 0.4 420.8 
Installation of prepaid gas meter 1397 5588.5 
Phasing out HCFCs  2 25 
AFOLU Sector 
The cost estimate for the implementation of Key  mitigations measures in the AFOLU sector under 
the unconditional and conditional scenario is outlined in table 7.  
Table 7: Estimated cost of key mitigation measures in AFOLU   
Mitigation Measure Estimated investment required (million USD, 
2021-2030) 
Unconditional Conditional 
Implement AWD in dry season rice field 17.65 35.29 
Varietal improvement  79.65 153.82 
Land management  1.23 3.69 
Fertilizer Management (deep placement in rice 
field) 2.40 7.20 
Bring More Area under pulse cultivation 5.29 0.00 
Replacement of low -productive animals with high -
producing crossbred cattle 8.15 16.29 
Feed improvement (Use of balanced diet and 
beneficial microorganism) 138.70 275.68 
Improve manure management (promotion of mini 
biogas plants, maintenance, training a nd 
awareness)  16.47 14.71 
Forestry related Activities 500 2000 
 
Waste Sector 
In the Waste Sector, the cost estimate for the implementation of Key mitigations measures in the 
energy sector under the unconditional and conditional scenario is outlined in table 8.  
Table 8: Estimated cost of key mitigation measures in Waste   
Mitigation Measure Estimated investment required (million USD, 
2021-2030) 
Unconditional Conditional 
Incineration plants 608 1791 
Municipal Solid Waste Management Facility  6 
Implementation of wastewater treatment plants   1958 
Regional Integrated Landfill and Resource 
Recovery Facility 
2.7 8.5 26 
Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding of 
Bangladesh’s NDC 
1. Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year) 
(a) Reference year(s), base year(s), 
reference period(s) or other starting 
point(s): 
The Base year for Bangladesh’s updated NDC is 2012.  
 
(b) Quantifiable information on the 
reference indicators, their v alues in the 
reference year(s),  base year(s), reference 
period(s) or other starting point(s), and, 
as applicable, in the target year: 
Total GHG emission accounts for 169.05 MtCO 2e for the 
Base Year 2012. The contributions of the sectors are;  
Energy: 93.09 MtCO2e 
IPPU: 5.61 MtCO2e 
AFOLU: 46.24 MtCO2e 
Waste: 24.11 MtCO2e 
Total GHG emission will be 409.4 MtCO2e in 2030 under 
BAU scenario. The contributions of the sectors are;  
Energy: 312.54 MtCO2e 
IPPU: 10.97 MtCO2e 
AFOLU: 55.01 MtCO2e 
Waste: 30.89 MtCO2e 
(c) For strategies, plans and actions 
referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the 
Paris Agreement, or polices and measures 
as components of nationally determined 
contributions where paragraph 1(b) 
above is not applicable, Parties to provide 
other relevant information: 
Not applicable. 
 
(d) Target relative to the reference 
indicator, expressed numerically, for 
example in percentage or amount of 
reduction: 
In unconditional scenario, GHG emissions would be 
reduced by 27.56 Mt CO 2e (6.73%) below BAU in 2030 
and in conditional scenario, GHG emissions would be 
reduced by 89.47 Mt CO 2e (21.85%) below BAU in 2030 
in the respective sectors. 
(e) Information on sources of data used in 
quantifying the reference point(s):  
 
 
The Base Year information is mainly from th e GHG 
inventory prepared in Third National Communications. 
Additionally, the base year emission has been updated 
with additional details for Fugitive emission from 
leakages in gas distribution network, F -gases, gas and 
electricity use in households, which were not included in 
the TNC. 
(f) Information on the circumstances 
under which the Party may update the 
Information on emissions and refe rence values may be 
updated and recalculated due to methodological 
improvements a pplicable to the inventories in their next 27 
values of the reference indicators: 
 
iteration for Biennial Update Report or National 
Communication. 
2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation:  
(a) Time frame and/or period for 
implementation, including start and end 
date, consistent with a ny further relevant 
decision adopted by the Conference of the 
Parties serving as the meeting of the 
Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA): 
From 1 January 2021- 31 December 2030. 
 
(b) Whether it is a single -year or multi -
year target, as applicable: 
Single-year targets for 2030. The target might be updated 
in 2025.  
3. Scope and coverage: 
(a) General description of the target: Economy-wide absolute targets for 2030 in the 
respective sectors mentioned in 1(b).  
(b) Sectors, gases, categories and pools 
covered by the nationally determined 
contribution, including, as applicable, 
consistent with Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines: 
The sectors are covered economy -wide while no 
quantified contribution is included for Forestry and IPPU. 
The gases included are CO 2, CH 4, N 2O, and hydro 
fluorocarbons (HFCs). IPCC 2006 guidelines were 
followed for the GHG inventory. 
(c) How the Party has taken into 
consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of 
decision 1/CP.21: 
Bangladesh has expanded the coverage of NDC by 
including more sectors than in INDC. 
(d) Mitigation co -benefits resulting from 
Parties’ adaptation actions and/or 
economic diversification plans, including 
description of specific projects, measures 
and initiatives of Parties’ adaptation 
actions and/or economic diversification 
plans: 
Not applicable. 
4. Planning processes: 
(a) Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally 
determined contribution and, if available, on the Party’s implementation plans, in cluding, as 
appropriate: 
 (i) Domestic institutional arrangements, 
public participation and engagement with 
local communities and indigenous 
peoples, in a gender-responsive manner: 
The updated NDC is prepared following a structured 
process involving stake holders from relevant ministries 
and agencies. The required data has been collected 
through IPCC suggested structured template from the 
agencies on present condition and future plans and 
projects relevant to GHG emission reduction. Following 
this, the init ial scenario analysis was carried out in LEAP 28 
program and outcomes have been validated with the 
relevant ministries and agencies in a validation 
workshop. The possible mitigation measures have been 
finalized based on the discussion in the validation 
process. Besides, the stakeholder consultations included 
participants from academia, the private sector and 
reporters.   
(ii) Contextual matters, including, inter 
alia, as appropriate: 
 
a. National circumstances, such as 
geography, climate, economy, sustainabl e 
development and poverty eradication: 
Bangladesh is a low -lying delta with a flat topography 
that makes it particularly susceptible to extreme weather 
events. The country is relatively small with an area of 
147,570 sq. km and located in South Asia. The cu rrent 
population of Bangladesh is 169.81 million in 2020. 
Among the different zones of the country, the climate 
change hotspots are in the central and western coastal 
area, the north -western highlands, and along the main 
rivers where both biophysical and s ocio-economic 
vulnerability are high. Bangladesh is one of the most 
vulnerable countries due to climate change as it faces 
multiple climate impacts like flood, drought, extreme 
temperature and rainfall, salinity and sea -level rise. 
Bangladesh has made subs tantial progress in the recent 
past through rapid economic development and poverty 
reduction measures. The country is also making progress 
in sustainable development and poverty eradication.  
b. Best practices and experience related to 
the preparation of the nationally 
determined contribution: 
The current NDC update is the result of experience gained 
and lessons learned from the Intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution (INDC) submitted to the  
UNFCCC in 2015, preparation of NDC implementation 
roadmap and  action plan in 2018 and National 
Communications to UNFCCC.  
c. Other contextual aspirations and 
priorities acknowledged when joining the 
Paris Agreement: 
Bangladesh has always bee n an active participant in 
international climate change negotiations. The c ountry 
demonstrated the same level of engagement in the 
negotiations, signing, and ratification of the Paris 
Agreement. Bangladesh is currently leading the Climate 
Vulnerable Forum for the second time. To implement the 
conditional contributions, Bangladesh  will require 
financial, technology transfer and capacity building 
related support from the international community. 
(b) Specific information applicable to 
Parties, including regional economic 
integration organizations and their 
member States, that have r eached an 
agreement to act jointly under Article 4, 
paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, 
Not applicable 29 
including the Parties that agreed to act 
jointly and the terms of the agreement, in 
accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 16 –
18, of the Paris Agreement: 
(c) How the Party’s preparation of its 
nationally determined contribution has 
been informed by the outcomes of the 
global stock take, in accordance with 
Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris 
Agreement: 
Bangladesh has updated its NDC to include additional 
sectors and enhanced its mitigation ambition from the 
first iteration. This will positively contribute to the global 
stock take in 2023. 
(d) Each Party with a nationally 
determined contribution under Article 4 
of the Paris Agreement that consists of 
adaptation action and/or economic 
diversification plans resulting in 
mitigation co -benefits consistent with 
Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris 
Agreement to submit information on: 
 
(i) How the economic and social 
consequences of response measures have 
been co nsidered in developing the 
nationally determined contribution: 
Not applicable 
 
(ii) Specific projects, measures and 
activities to be implemented to contribute 
to mitigation co -benefits, including 
information on adaptation plans that also 
yield mitigation co-benefits, which may 
cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, 
such as energy, resources, water 
resources, coastal resources, human 
settlements and urban planning, 
agriculture and forestry; and economic 
diversification actions, which may cover, 
but are  not limited to, sectors such as 
manufacturing and industry, energy and 
mining, transport and communication, 
construction, tourism, real estate, 
agriculture and fisheries: 
Not applicable 
5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for es timating and accounting 
for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:  
(a) Assumptions and methodological 
approaches used for accounting for 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions 
Bangladesh had prepared its national inventories based 
on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and other IPCC guidelines. 
Most of the analysis fol lowed Tier 1 methodology, while 30 
and removals corresponding to the Party’s 
nationally determined contribution, 
consistent with decision 1/CP.21, 
paragraph 31, and accounting guidance 
adopted by the CMA: 
Bangladesh has prepared its Forest Reference Level using 
Tier 2 methodology.  
 
(b) Assumptions and methodological 
approaches used for accounting for the 
implementation of policies and measures 
or strategies in the nationall y determined 
contribution: 
In addition to 5(a) above, Bangladesh will also apply 
specific assumptions and methodologies, when 
appropriate, when assessing progress made under the 
policies and measures related to the implementation of 
its NDC in its National  Communications and Biennial 
Update Reports. 
(c) If applicable, information on how the 
Party will take into account existing 
methods and guidance under the 
Convention to account for anthropogenic 
emissions and removals, in accordance 
with Article 4, parag raph 14, of the Paris 
Agreement, as appropriate: 
See 5 (a) above. 
(d) IPCC methodologies and metrics used 
for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas emissions and removals: 
See 5 (a) above. 
(e) Sector -, category - or activity -specific 
assumptions, method ologies and 
approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, 
as appropriate, including, as applicable: 
 
(i) Approach to addressing emissions and 
subsequent removals from natural 
disturbances on managed lands: 
 
Not Applicable. 
 
(ii) Approach used to account for 
emissions and removals from harvested 
wood products: 
Not Applicable. 
(iii) Approach used to address the effects 
of age-class structure in forests: Not Applicable. 
(f) Other assumptions and methodological 
approaches used for understanding the 
nationally determined contribution and, if 
applicable, estimating corresponding 
emissions and removals, including: 
 
(i) How the reference indicators, 
baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), 
including, where applicable, sector -, 
category- or activity -specific reference  
levels, are constructed, including, for 
example, key parameters, assumptions, 
definitions, methodologies, data sources 
Bangladesh hasn 't used any other assumptions or 
methodological approaches. Details of the assumption 
and data sources a re described in Base Year and Future 
Emission Scenario section. 31 
and models used: 
(ii) For Parties with nationally determined 
contributions that contain non greenhouse 
gas components, information on 
assumptions and methodological 
approaches used in relation to those 
components, as applicable: 
Not applicable. 
(iii) For climate forcers included in 
nationally determined contributions not 
covered by IPCC guidelines, information 
on how the climate forcers are estimated: 
Not applicable. 
(iv) Further technical information, as 
necessary: 
Not applicable. 
(g) The intention to use voluntary 
cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris 
Agreement, if applicable: 
Yes, when appropriate. Bangladesh has participated in 
the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol 
and continues to b elieve in the important role of 
innovative financing mechanism for climate actions with 
sustainable development benefits. The cooperative 
approaches in market and non -market mechanisms 
under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement are an important 
instrument to r aise mitigation ambition while promoting 
sustainable development.  
6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in 
the light of its national circumstances: 
(a) How the Party considers that its 
nationally de termined contribution is fair 
and ambitious in the light of its national 
circumstances: 
 
Bangladesh contributes less than 0.35% of global 
emissions. However, Bangladesh recognizes that in order 
to meet the 2 degrees objective all countries will need to 
undertake drastic mitigation measures. Bangladesh 's 
approach is driven by the long -term goal announced by 
its Prime Minister that its per capita GHG emissions will 
not exceed the average for developing countries. 
Therefore, Bangladesh 's approach focuses on pu tting 
itself on a pathway which will avoid an increase of 
emissions per capita beyond this level, while pursuing 
national development goals. 
Bangladesh is still putting forward actions that will allow 
the country to embark on a low carbon development 
pathway, keeping in mind the global climate change 
agenda. This NDC update represents an enhanced 
ambition for mitigation with a substantial increase from 
the INDC. 
The actions needed to deliver on these commitments will 32 
require international support in the for m of finance, 
technology transfer and capacity building. Bangladesh 
will also provide a relevant contribution regard ing 
national financial resources, staff time and robust 
integration of development and mitigation activities. 
In selecting the actions set o ut above, Bangladesh has 
prioritized those which fit with the growth priorities set 
out in our national development plans. In addition, 
Bangladesh has captured the synergies between 
mitigation and adaptation. The INDC suggested measures 
have already been t aken forward by the country’s own 
resources, thus demonstrating that Bangladesh is not 
content to wait for international support to take action on 
climate change. 
(b) Fairness considerations, including 
reflecting on equity: 
See 6 (a) above. 
(c) How the P arty has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement: 
The updated unconditional and conditional contributions 
of Bangladesh have increased emission reduction targets 
substantially. The unconditional target has been 
increased from 12 MtCO2e to 27.56 MtCO2e below BAU in 
2030. The conditional target has been increased from 36 
MtCO2e to 89.47 MtCO2e below BAU in 2030. 
(d) How the Party has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement: 
 
Despite being a least developing country, Banglade sh has 
already adopted an absolute, economy -wide target in this 
NDC update. 
(e) How the Party has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement: 
Not applicable. 
7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the ob jective of 
the Convention as set out in its Article 2: 
(a) How the nationally determined 
contribution contributes towards 
achieving the objective of the Convention 
as set out in its Article 2: 
See 6(a) and 6(c) above. 
 
(b) How the nationally determined 
contribution contributes towards Article 
2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 
1, of the Paris Agreement: 
See 6(a) and 6(c) above. 33





Our Team – Green Lead






















































 









		Skip to content






 


HOME
IMPACT
INITIATIVES

W4C CLAN GCL CLIMATED Stories of climate action GL at COP h-map

RE-ENERGIZE BANGLADESH
CLIMATE CONVERSATION
UNPLASTIC BANGLADESH
CLIMATE STREAM
OUR TEAM





X
 










 















CORE MEMBERs 







Md. Fahim  HossainFounderMy purpose in life is to lead for impact with creativity, courage, and care. I am driven by this purpose-compass and building my way forward through exploration, gratitude, and turning all the stones to create a meaningful pathway.Mohammad Iftekher (Iftu)  Ebne JalalProject CoordinatorI'm a driven Renaissance soul, fueled by turning the impossible into reality. My purpose goes beyond clichés - I make tangible impacts, from reducing plastic waste to championing renewable energy. I don't just dream; I take action, ready to drive global change.Maayeesha FarzanaProject CoordinatorI aspire to create tech for societal uplift, driven by a passion for positive change. Interested in empowering others through technology? Let's connect and make a difference.MD Irfan MahmoodProject AssistantI'm an undergraduate student in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (EEE). Failures don't discourage me; I'm motivated by a vision of making a meaningful impact in life. My dedication lies in pushing boundaries, embracing challenges, and striving to create a positive difference.Md Sajidul MowlaTech Solutions ArchitectI'm a final-year computer science student with a strong passion for AI and climate awareness. I'm dedicated to harnessing AI to address the pressing climate crisis and advocate for accessible climate educationAhad Bin AzadProject AssistantI value genuine connections with others, believing in our collective power to make a difference, which, to me, embodies 'Joie de vivre' – the Joy of living. My faith inspires my responsibility to people and the environment, driving me to leave a charitable legacy for future generations."Priyam ChakrabortyProject AssistantGreetings! I’m Priyam Chakraborty, currently studying in the Department of Mechanical Engineering in CUET. I don’t believe in spaceship but I strongly believe in hardship.Ratnajit DharTech Solutions ArchitectA CSE undergraduate student. Driven by an insistent curiosity, I thrive on acquiring new knowledge and skills each day. With a relentless enthusiasm for learning, I am committed to exploring the ever-evolving landscape of technology and its applications.Arpita MallikTech Solutions ArchitectA CSE undergrad dedicated with a strong work ethic, and always striving for self-improvement and growth. I believe in the power of learning and constantly seek new knowledge to expand my horizons.Navia HasanProject AssistantAs a Mechanical Engineering undergraduate with experience in project management, content writing, research, and event coordination, I am passionate about the intersection of technology and societal impact. My curiosity about how industries influence our daily lives and drive positive change motivates me to leverage my expertise to contribute to innovative solutions.Raihanul KarimProject Assistant Restless, curious, and a bit of a perfectionist, I thrive on collaboration and reliability. My love for travel and reading broadens my perspective. I'm detail-oriented and passionate about nature, driven by a deep sense of responsibility and faith to actively contribute to the planet's well-being and advocate for positive change.








Community leaders 















 


																	Syeda Tasfia Arobe																
Community Leader



 









 


																	Amimul Ihasan																
Community Leader



 









 


																	Mehraz Uddin Khan																
Community Leader



 









 


																	Towhidul Islam																
Community Leader



 









 


																	Fuad Mahmud Zarif																
Community Leader



 













YOUTH ADVISORS 







Connor DonnellyIncoming Senior Consultant, DeloitteIbtisam BabarRegional Manager Special Initiatives, Zindigi, JS BANKJay Kishan Panjiyar Business  Development and Innovation Manager, Khalti MD Tahidul Islam MasumPresident, Volunteer For Bangladesh, Bandarban






















Our Mission 











Our mission is to empower humanity for climate action and accelerate the chain of actions. 







 











Our Purpose 











Our purpose is to align your purpose in life towards creating a green and peaceful world. 







Our Core Values 











We share the common values and driven by our compass 






 
We love people and planet



 
We build shared success



 
We are responsible for the responsible work we do 





























Join us to lead for a green world 















Open roles (volunteer) 







Perks of being part of Green Lead 











Experience: Gain hands-on experience in designing and implementing technology solutions for climate action.Career Capital: Enhance your skills and build a portfolio of meaningful projects in the sustainability and technology sectors.Recommendations: Receive personalized letters of recommendation from Green Lead leadership, acknowledging your contributions and dedication.Connections: Join a global network of like-minded individuals and experts passionate about climate action and sustainable development.Compensation: You will be compensated for any relevant cost and will receive an honorarium for funded-project contribution. 






 

















Project Coordinator












Community Coordinator
















Tech Solutions architect












Fundraising coordinator
















Marketing coordinator












Graphics Designer 













 








 




HOME
IMPACT
INITIATIVESMenu Toggle

W4C
CLAN
GCL
CLIMATED
Stories of climate action
GL at COP
h-map


RE-ENERGIZE BANGLADESH
CLIMATE CONVERSATION
UNPLASTIC BANGLADESH
CLIMATE STREAM
OUR TEAM
 







 
























Facebook
 



Twitter
 



Whatsapp
 



Linkedin
 



Instagram
 










email us













Copyright © 2025 Green Lead | Powered by Climate Intelligent Technologies (CIT)






 






































